And he opened up the files so that people could work with the government to make sure that those services are held, to make sure that the person gets attention, the person gets a certificate, the person gets the job, etc. And this has now been replicated to the entire state as well. So in any district of the state, if you are file distancing, you have a better way of getting that information rather than constantly going to the office. And pay for child and everything in that.

The same thing, you know, code or something. What is the Right to Information Act? So we as citizens are allowed to have information about the government. It didn't happen because one day someone woke up or someone foreign woke up and said that citizens are allowed to know information. It came to a group of people who constantly were not paid their money, who were constantly told. Then they kept pressurizing so much that they were told, "You are not allowed to know. There is no law which lets you know what happened to the people." And so this group of people kept petitioning, petitioning, petitioning. And after 10 years, there was finally a law that was introduced saying that yes, there is a right to explanation.

So we like to assume that laws, acts, amendments, and things like this come because the first view, the liberal view, is like when elections happen or representatives have been bought, now the representative will figure it out. That's the liberal view. The republican view is that individuals have to constantly be engaged in it.

Yeah. It is like, if you just speak from the personal aspect of why we want to participate, it just feels like there is work involved together. There is work that us individuals have to do with that, whatever you want to do. It feels like the topic, compensation, is not—like there's no existing immediate compensation that you get for doing this work as a person. And that's why I feel like, at least I'm just speaking for my example, maybe that's why I chose—I give my 24 hours as being limited and my aspect of balance are not there. I just feel that, hey, this thing that is important to me, but if I'm the only person who's gonna have to work towards it, it feels more like a public service, altruistic act, and as, okay, you know, I'm doing something for myself. And I don't know how to like it out.

Do most of you live in housing societies? Whether it is an apartment or something else, but otherwise. So, you know, in housing society, there are cooperative housing societies. There is a secretary, there is a treasurer, there is a general assembly, there are meetings, your parents need your members' audience. There is no compensation for it. But this is what you do because you live there.

So the fact that whether a leakage on the roof needs to be repaired or not is a community decision that has been made. There is no generic compensation for it. But it's such that that act of deciding whether, yes, we remove this playground, or yes, to take care of this leakage or not, it's a community decision that benefits or does not benefit the community, which includes yourself. And that's precisely why the republican conception is you are not supposed to be public sector. No one pays you to go to—

It's not really that for us voting centers are always—it's almost as a law that voting stations need to be within walking distance. Even if you do not have money, you should be in the voting. Similarly, even if you do not have the money, you should be able to participate.

So yeah, I mean, compensation is—why this is not a—I don't think compensation is the right word, but I guess you get the general sort of aspect where, yeah, it's usually more of like a public service.

Which I get.

Ah, so don't participate. Don't go for tests and keep getting your exams nullified again and again because corruption will continue. Participation means the benefit of that is somebody in the government said, "Okay, this leakage is a problem. Now let me do something which hopefully stops the leaks in examinations." And that's your compensation right there. That's what you benefit from that.

How's your compensation part? Which project, you guys? The one employee is—

Sorry, speak freely and I have to do it. Value products. Value improvement. No, whether the product is—who happens to be my teacher, and I just put the thing just to—

That's not expert citizenship.

Which ratio is it? And then we are—think of, think of—I mean, there is a rugged who talks of citizenship, but Bulgarian certainly does not. For example, ATPR goes and annoys the government, and they get collected from property and they get paid by them. There are other proprieties that take so much.

So you are saying compensation is not?

I'm not saying that. So like everything else, political participation has also become professionalized. There are—we should be able to do that.

In India, there is one association for democratic or something like that. And I work on that technology—I don't know. So, the new geometric or the old gender. Yeah, we don't have money for it. No, he didn't take money for it, but we started out and it profited. Yeah, but they don't do it because it takes their credit button, you know? Might be true.

Okay. There is a fraction of people who have permitted, as I said, into a... So there are organizations like Civic Cylinder, which is one of them; Moham Sarta also another, News Intradash Nada, and others, who do take their positions and who do spend their money in hiring professionals.

What do these professionals do? Suppose you do not know how to file an RPI; you go to them, and they file an RPI on your behalf. Now, I don't think that's compensation for work. It's just somebody doing your work for you. But the spirit behind it is not compensation.

In Republican citizenship, in any form of citizenship, monetary compensation is not the benefit. So, if you are making decisions about your cooperative housing society so that you get more money in the future, then that's not really citizenship. If you are doing it because it defines the place where you live, where you inhabit, which has an implication on your life and your benefits, then that's citizenship.

So, with all of these three perceptions, the idea is not about immediate monetary benefits. But the idea is about the state. Remember the notion—I mean, okay, so that's one thing I want to point out. Even though I'm teaching in discrete individual blocks, do not forget the past. Remember the social contract?

Why does the state exist? To take money from you? No. The state exists because we have some sort of contract with the state. In the liberal idea, once you create the state, the state will take care of things; you don't need to worry about it. In the Republican idea, you constantly need to remind the state what your contract with the state is. Because, as some people say, if that contract is not fulfilled, then you either vote out the government or you create a release. Those are conditions.

In the community, you are duty-bound to the state; you are duty-bound to your fellow citizens. And I have one thing which will help probably understand this a little bit better.

But, you know, okay, it's fine. We'll do it. Just—what about maybe the idea that the public view is a privilege? We are privileged enough that we should consider ourselves citizens, and especially in the Republican idea, you said that a good citizen should do this. But most of India cannot be a good citizen. It's impossible because they're working all day, they run the education, they run the ability to participate politically, and to sort of do the exact things that cannot be.

Yeah, which is why election days tend to be qualitation. It's to encourage people. The state will not have development in most places. In other places, the famous example of India is that an entire team of election officials go all the way through two or three rivers and three or four mountains to reach that one solitary line, because the poor old man cannot come down to the pitch too. So, yes, the state does make an effort to reach the citizens and to encourage the citizens.

There are two things that I wanted to talk about which may possibly assist these questions in understanding these questions.

First is something connected to what we have already done in the last couple of semesters. Is this idea of how do we understand citizenship? Do we understand citizenship? No, let me rephrase that. Should citizenship be individual, or should citizenship be group-differentiated?

So let's try to understand this a little. As we have always said, post the end of colonization and post the end of—sorry, yeah, post the end of colonization and after the end of the Second World War, as most modern states perform, we have already highlighted that these states had recognized that within each state, there are people who did not enjoy the same kind of license.

So, whether it is caste, whether it is gender, whether it is economic classes, there are people who do not enjoy the true benefits of what they are supposed to enjoy. We also identified that after the end of colonization and after the Second World War, you have a lot of migration around the world, which means that it's not only white people in France anymore. It's not only one kind of religious community in one particular country anymore, but there has been a certain mixture of people that has taken place.

In the 1980s and the 1990s, remember we were talking about multiculturalism, et cetera, in the last couple of semesters.

So through the '90s onwards, there were groups of political thinkers, including Will Kymlicka, who you remember from India Studios, and somebody called Iris Marion Young. They made this argument that our conception of citizenship is a very individual conception of citizenship, and we need to move to a conception of group-differentiated citizenship.

What did they mean by this? They said precisely this: Not everybody has that liberal capacity to participate in politics, right? Not everybody gets their voice heard on the national scale or at the local state level. Not everybody can publish editorial articles in newspapers. Not everybody can make an Instagram Reel. Not everybody can make their voice heard outside.

And so, if this comes largely from the republican view of citizenship—that citizenship should be a participatory exercise, that everybody should come together and make decisions—what Kymlicka and Young and others started arguing is that we cannot have only an individuated conception of citizenship, but we should have a group-differentiated conception. It means that there are certain members of certain groups that do not enjoy the full benefits of citizenship. And therefore, we need to give them more power so that they get equal citizenship status and not a secondary citizenship status.

So, a simple example: I say nice things—I mean, I do enjoy some parts of Rousseau—but Rousseau was also an idiot. He was a white man of his time, and Munani suggested that women should get the right to education and women should get the right to work. Rousseau said society will dictate that women should do needlework, and women should learn about hygiene and taking care of the home and things like this.

That was an idea that was also reflected in many of our founding fathers. So Tilak was of the view that women should not be educated and women should not receive Christian training and all of this. They should not be employed outside the house, domestic skill and their skill.

Now, if you take this as something that the founding fathers of India have said, do you believe in 1947 magically all women suddenly get the power to vote? They will not, right? As a group, women do not enjoy the same freedom of speech and expression, and do not enjoy the same powers of voting.

You look at the government statistics of participation in voting by gender, and you will see it is terrible at the time of independence. It increases gradually, but it is not so great at the current moment in India. Even today, we are pretty aware that empirical studies have shown that at local elections, especially at the MLA and lower elections, women who are elected to women-reserved seats tend to be proxy leaders, which means they're actually their husband's political party that has propped them.

So, what Iris Marion Young and Kymlicka require is clearly whether it is in the form of voting, whether it is in the form of political representation, or whether it is in the form of political participation, not all groups enjoy the same kind of citizenship. And therefore, we need to introduce a group-differentiated ideal of citizenship, which means they give certain benefits to certain groups so that they are able to participate in governance, so that they are able to participate in decision-making in a much more substantive manner.

This is not only about reservation; this is about hundreds of other things. Reservations would be one way to do so, but there are other ways of creating local community leaderships, local participatory exercises, and self-government groups that are more accessible to these historically marginalized groups.

So if we thought that Iris Marion Young would argue that at some point in time, if India goes ahead and absorbs Great Sentinel Island and makes everybody their citizen, then it should not be that the Indian state goes in and forces everybody: absorb it, get this passport, so forth and so forth. It is not a simple thing by telling them, "Hey, from now you start voting, and we will take care of them," because he is aware that it's not going to be a simple act.

Instead, he says perhaps we should have a local council which has slightly more powers than other people, than other governments. So we do have certain provisions in the Indian Constitution and certain provisions that allow for local communities to have more powers. Tribal communities in Central India, as well as in Northeast India, enjoy certain benefits of local self-rule. Village communities enjoy certain benefits.

I just see an example, like what you were just wrapping up with, is like the French banana locals and public topic, is when it requires people in public spaces to be these abstract citizens, but how do we define that abstract citizen? These groups are fundamentally different, and these rights can mean something else to different people.

Kymlicka makes the argument that banning how people practice their religion or practice their culture takes the individuality of citizenship. That all citizens should behave in this particular manner. In public, they should not wear this particular kind of clothing in public. That's an individual view of the state budget, does not acknowledge. But he would argue is certainly give, to some extent, members of a religious community or members of a cultural group certain rights which differentiate them as a group. So allow Sikhs to carry kirpans, allow Muslims to wear whatever they want to wear, allow Jewish communities to wear their traditional attire, so on and so forth. Very simply because Kymlicka argues that those rights mean something for the individual. They have a certain kind of importance for the individual, and that should not be neglected. However, Kymlicka also makes the argument that you allow group-differentiated rights which do not interfere with individual rights, which means that if a certain group believes that women should not get education, that does not mean you allow this group to conceal it, right? Because it interferes with the individual's right to get an education. I like the style a little bit, but I feel like even I can, it can be important here, like.

One of the things I've seen is a comparison between Pakistan and Turkey, where they had similar ideas. Pakistan put a group-differentiated idea of being Muslim at the forefront of their country, where these specific people have these specific rights. Turkey, like, why it's considered to be the most successful country, why things work out better, is because you're Turkish before you're also, and thus that identity means that the individual rights are defined for just being Turkish for everyone, and thus creating that Turkish citizen who is a Muslim instead of being a Muslim citizen.

Yes, although one would not make that statement of Turkey throughout the last 50 years, it has got to individual access. Do you know that Atatürk is the one who sets up the one who set it out on the path of modernization? Atatürk therefore 25 biggest individual rights versus two differentiated rights, which is also where many of their partners of the other.

Because remember, it's nice to imagine that Pakistan is Muslim and Turkey is Muslim, but Turkey has like 20 every community which all practice different forms of Islam, and they even practice. On one of these state religions, and so even within dominant— I mean, if you look at any country which you think has a dominant religion or a dominant culture, it has multiple ethnic groups which do not necessarily agree with what the central governments do.

But I think this is an excellent point, and in fact, identity is central to this question. In fact, Kymlicka's big work is called Identity and Citizenship because he thinks that citizenship is not only about political identity, but it is about cultural identity. It is about what you and I consider as important to us within the public space and within our private space as well. How do we produce on and out?

To say that they had that citizenship was merely being part of being citizens tricky in that semi-air. Because there are Kurdish minorities there which are completely refreshed or even if in their language. Speaking Kurdish is probably banned in Kurdish. So it's not like you can say that it's a very modern way of speaking.

But then that doesn't match anything in the Western liberal model because it's not like being in a different language. There are Western mistakes which we say in case and things like that. Yeah, of course it's not that bad. But when we say it's a modern conception of citizenship, it's a modern conception of the state, it is essentially saying that we're supposed to be different. It is supposed to be non-differentiated. Because it is taking this position, we do not discriminate as long as everybody follows these norms. But the norms will be marginal.

Yeah, but that is one of the major criticisms of modernity, right? That modernity assumes it is giving everybody individual rights, et cetera, et cetera, but it does end up opposing a minority. Postmodernism essentially says that you need to look at narratives of what citizenship is perceived by Turkish narratives instead of Turkish narratives.

So I agree with you that it's an extraordinary thing. Anti-minority groups, but that does not stop it from being a model on the scale. And I would like to see individuals as well. Supposed to preface the individual versus it has a very limited idea of who the individual is and what are the individual behaviors that it should follow, but it is not necessary that that automatically makes it anti-modern as a form of government or its view of citizenship. We have criticisms of young people.

Is the idea of building the abstract citizen, and there is the non-trivial internal migrant workers crisis of India, which I thought is good in the sense that we view the abstract citizen as someone who owns a home, who's present at this one place, and thus you have residence and you can vote, right? But people aren't like that, right? Some people, because of travelling in the country, do not have the ability to have a permanent residence, and thus this right to vote, which is an individually important right, is not set up correctly for migrant workers. Yes.

It's also true for international migration. Remember that a major, quite a substantial part of India's workforce works outside the nation, and they cycle in the community. But they're still full citizens every year to have a question.

When you talk about an individualistic view, what do you mean by individual? Because isn't individual bad enough? That one individual is different from another. So groups shouldn't specifically matter. If I, as an individual, believe in another religion, the other individual doesn't have to be. Does the Indian Constitution say that Muslims and Sikhs and Christians and Parsis and Hindus are a lot poorer? What does it say?

No, no, that's not what I'm considering. In other words, it is the liberal view: that all individuals are endowed with certain rights, which are, remember, the very first thing we said about citizenship: membership that grants rights or grants entitlement. So now we translate entitlements to rights.

There is one way of making the argument that I am recognizing all of you as individuals who have certain rights and are participating in the making of this class, in the making of this institution, in the making of this country.

The other way is to start looking at it as groups: that the last ventures are one group of people who may be considered in a specific way because of whatever group, or women need to be considered in the circle, or people coming from lower-income areas need to be considered as a career.

So, when we use the word individual or group-differentiated, we are looking at it from the point of view of the state. Because if the state takes a position that I will not differentiate with any of my citizens, then, as I said, the criticism is that historically marginalized groups will not be able to enjoy individual citizenship rights in the same way that other groups are.

So it is nice to take a position where I say, “Ah, everybody seems the same to me,” but do individuals, like, really have those particular groups really have the same powers as anybody?

Let me use this as an example of the environment. I don't know what is a terrible example for this, but I use Bangalore and Yelahanka. This case around three years ago, when the construction of the Metro meant the cutting of the greenery in Cubbon Park in Bengaluru, where they said that we need to cut off the trees in order to make people protest at the ground, and it was put on hold. It did not go through.

At that point in time, citizens believed in the republican conception of citizenship. Remember, it's group-differentiated. It's people in Mumbai; it's our political part of the group which asked for the rights. The government got it and did not lose it.

Very simply, if I was doing one work, I would do a data-scraping exercise of the number of protests that tribal communities have made about the environment and how many times the state has worked.

So, do this exercise: take urban examples where citizens have protested and governments have heard them, and take another set where rural or tribal populations have protested and the state has heard them. You will see very clear group-differentiated ideas of the future.

Sorry, you want to do differentiated idea, you will see that certain populations have better positions in society as citizens than others. Again, going back to Mumbai, Mumbai is a city of flyovers. There are millions of flyovers in the city, except on Peddar Road, which has hurried traffic. Why? Because one day Lata Mangeshkar said, “If you build this flyover, I will leave this city.” That plan was set. Lata Mangeshkar has said. An individual citizen has far more powers as a citizen than anybody else in the city.

Clearly, when you really decide that I will not build this other land, they start to be involved here. So, we know that there are people who enjoy different social, different quality and historical reasons of citizenship. I mean, for me in Hyderabad, it is very, very distinctly a class problem. There is one part of the city where services are nicely laid out, another part of the city where services are shared. There are specific classes of automobiles that get away from doing everything that people each turn supply and do. There is a certain class of vehicles that the police targets and takes a rise on. And this is because the state has always pushed us differently.

Even though constitutionally it will say all of you are free and equal individuals, it has always considered us unequal for a variety of reasons. When I say the state, again, members of the state. So, in an instance where individual citizenship is really not equal because different people have different genders of this, Kymlicka and Young say that group-differentiated citizenship is necessary, that certain groups need to be treated in certain ways, need to be given certain citizenship powers that are more necessary.

Is that what I'm saying? Okay, so the other thing I wanted to do was—so this is the idea of citizens' power, what citizens enjoy, what kind of rights, etc. What I want to do is to look a little bit closely at this Republican idea of assimilation. And to do so, there is a great example, there is a great approach to this. I've uploaded this to the model as well.

So this person called Sherry Arnstein wrote this nice nine-page article. It's not one of those 35-page annoying articles in two minutes. This is just nine cases, where she says that the way citizens participate has a certain distribution. There are different ways in which citizens participate in relation to it. And she quite gives her a ladder of participation. And this perhaps will help address both these questions of individual citizenship and community area citizenship, as well as the republican conception of citizenship as something that is very active, the idea of citizenship—that it's not only about membership, it's not only about having a passport or another card or something like this, that it is actually about engaging the law.

As you can notice on the right-hand side, Arnstein has three categories. The lowermost category is non-participation. You guys that don't participate about anything to do with the program. You mean I'm just making a result. Second, there are ways in which participation happens, but it's a bit tokenistic. So she calls it degrees of tokenism. There are three ways of token participation. Do you understand tokenistic, right? Like people do it, but it doesn't mean so much. It doesn't have that much of an impact, right?

And the final thing she says is that it is truly a citizen-driven country. There is true citizen power, and that's only at the term. So let's try to—because the terms are a bit, if not, that what you mean, I'm joined. Okay.

So, at the lowest end of the citizenship is manipulation: rubber-stamp advisory committees with the purpose of engineering support. So this is typically—just to give you a bit, tiny bit of context—Arnstein is writing in the context of planning. How do you plan a city or how do you plan a project and things like this? And she's reflecting on planning as a way of engaging people.

So what we are learning maybe, like this idea of an advisory committee. So, the TA thing, okay. Too many people make points. So, apparently, in 2018, there was a committee, and this committee was a similar protest about the HM in 2018. How much review is this? Renew it? So, in 2018, a committee was made to review this.

Now what this committee did was it provided a list of recommendations, and then the thing died out. Okay. Technical selection committee has done this, recommendations have happened, so something will happen. But apparently those committee recommendations never actually meant anything. They were never really implemented in the entities. But it managed to calm the citizens really down.

Now that is very clearly a manipulative exercise. We can put here as needed from an Arnsteinian perspective because it really did a—we heard the students, we heard the faculty, we issued these suggestions. And people have agreed, so it's used to engineer support also.

People have agreed that this is a good way of doing this. Is it real support? It may not be. Is it really bringing about a change? No.

The second stage is therapy, which is when you say, you know, actively go to—so she calls it a pseudo-participatory program—to tell citizens that they are the problem. This often happens with lower-income settlements. We have something called slum rehabilitation in place, where people who are living in informal settlements or smaller households and informal units are told that it’s better if you live in another area, in an apartment, instead of this setup.

The vocabulary that they use when they go and do Gram Sabhas and community meetings in these neighbourhoods—and what Arnstein says—is essentially that they are saying, “Slum dwellers, you are the problem. The true problem of organization is…” So here we are offering support to you on how to make your life better. So that’s what we see in therapy.

There are other examples which, yeah, maybe we will come to, but understanding the ladder is important.

Third is informing, which is the flyover outside. The government says, “Look, traffic is bad in the city. Flyovers are the best thing to improve traffic, so we’re building a traffic network.” It’s merely informing. It doesn’t want to know from you how to make this better, and please conserve the safety.

Some of the record problems that are there are—no, it says by the one and it will improve the scale.

Then we are a little—so now we have come to the token aspect. Okay. Informing is open. There is consultation, so you are inviting opinion. The consultation process, compared with other modes of participation, means you are asking for their opinion, but you are not turning it into an election or relating it into a poll, and there is no assurance that this will be taken into account.

For me, my favourite, which is my PhD, is Smart Cities. At the beginning of the Smart Cities program, thousands and thousands of citizens in every city were asked, “What do you want as a smart city?” People wrote essays, people did polling, and there were things on MyGov.in and other portals. Then you could go and say, “In Hyderabad, I think water and sanitation are the most important things that need to be developed.”

In my city in Gujarat, everybody said that flooding is a big problem in the region and that needs to be addressed. But this is not tangible in the sense that they do not necessarily conduct a mode to see that efforts means that it is not combined with other modes of participation. It is doing “Suno, poll karo,” and that also, “report karo,” or you let your MP know, and that’s all they do.

But, as in the case of Google Express, there is nothing done about the smart city and water and sanitation, because the state wants to listen to you, but it really doesn’t want to take any action at all.

On the triple-IT campus, there are many things that fall under this category where people in positions of power will say—sometimes this is me as well—sometimes they will say, “Well, tell you what your problem is,” and you do not really do anything about it. That’s a concentrated approach.

Better than that is placation. So there is some influence. Students are merely involved to demonstrate that they were involved, but a few hand-picked worthy individuals on boards who are not accountable and can be easily outvoted are often involved.

Now, I want to say, I don’t know whether this is really true, but things like clubs would call it this kind of thing, where you have a leadership, but you are not really sure whether that leadership is really a representation and whether it’s really what you wanted to say.

What’s the point of this? When you look at the world around you, you realize that we are—well, okay. The point is this: once you go up this ladder and somebody comes and tells you that your voice matters, you can immediately recognize where on the ladder it falls. Yes, you are at the lowest amount of the ladder; the higher you go, there are tangible outcomes for it. And that’s solely based on my participation and interest, right?

I mean, seeing this class, this classification will be in the back of our minds anyway. So again, by defining and critiquing in that nice manner, what’s the achievement of this whole argument? I still can’t see any point.

Qualitatively or quantitatively, review whether IIIT is a space—is the institution that you are a part of a space that actually listens to you or not. You need to have some sort of way to decide whether it is actually listening to you or not.

I mean, we call ourselves a democracy. We call ourselves a faculty-run and student-run institute. But are they really a faculty- and student-run institute?

The next time somebody comes to you and says, you know, your participation matters, you can say, according to Arnstein's number five, do they go into your personal power gain? Right. I mean, I'm being facetious there. But what I'm also trying to suggest is, for citizens who are engaged in citizenship in the republican view of citizens, citizenship that, yes, we really need to participate. This provides a great view in evaluating how an authority or a government or a council is actually making decisions.

In fact, this is one of the most translatable quantitative exercises that you could do in a university that complains about how vague and ambiguous social sciences are. This is as precise as can be.

So, consultation happened as you were speaking, by the way. The new TA statements were announced just now. The Parliament withdrew their support from the Institute's decision because they were much lower than what the Parliament proposed.

Oh, interesting. So the Parliament is on the side of the United States students, and it's making it known.

Okay. So the next task for both of you is to see that A, there is the student parliament. Is the student parliament doing this because it wants to placate your population? Then it may be grow so far, but so what? It still has to follow the laws of the NGO. Or is it partition where really it is making your TA desire known to the institution and things like this?

So remain frustrated because we are going up the ladder and we are going to take three or four more widgets.

Yeah, but this is typically—it used to happen in my school, like club heads won't be appointed by the school, by the teachers, right? They were not really representative of the people. But whatever, this person is a nice person, you know, and you should tell them. And so there is some consultation and things like this. But there is no real accountability.

And when that person actually takes your side and supports you, the institution can say, you know, they actually performed very badly in exams, so they were facing them. Again, there are other parallels you can draw here, and that's okay.

So this is where the sixth, seventh, and eighth is where true citizenship happens. Partnership, where shared planning and decision-making responsibilities, joint policy boards, planning committees, mechanisms, so everybody sits on the same page.

Communities on campus where students are very actively involved. There are certain communities where students are not involved. And I know this because I am a member of some of these communities. And there is a difference in that, right? And of course, there are power differences between the two. But there is some shared commitment from both sides that we need to come together and make decisions.

Delegated power is when you—it's very rare in the Indian case, and it's very, absolutely rare in Triple I think—there are certain sectors where citizens are told, you make the decision about that.

So, assume there is a plot of land which has a residential area and there is a garden supposed to be put. We say, okay, we will not decide where the garden is; you guys decide. And which trees we plant is your instruction. So there is delegated power, where then the bargaining happens between you rather than between you and the state.

And the highest form, which is citizens' control, is citizens determine in full all the elements of public policy, how to manage something, and negotiate conditions under which outsiders—which means you ask for consultants, you ask for questions to come and give them to you, but you decide to what extent.

This is something that would happen in a housing society: the roof is leaking, it needs to be repaired, so you invite an external engineer to come. That external engineer says there are three options: one is expensive, one is cheap, one is long-term, one is short-term. And then that person goes out and you make the rest of it. Do we prioritize long-term or short-term, or do we prioritize priorities? The decision-making remains.

Citizens' control is very rare, of course. In cases like solid, in what are known as Canada's decisions, which are small provinces, small units, there is a lot of citizens' control. But of course, there are certain sectors such as defense and things like this, where citizens' control is not about it.

But what this ladder allows us to do is, it allows us to look at how can we really benefit from citizens' control. Not only because things are structured basically about that, but how do you mobilize it to actually actively get to work on it?

So, for the true writing of Twitter ID and making decisions, et cetera, it is not only about delaying the market. A student's parliament, which is somewhere through integration and partnership.

But perhaps you may want to have better ways of engaging and better ways of holding accountability and having decision-making.

At this point, stop now because they are in the class, and I wanted to start something else, but we are not going to. So that's a small adjustment. So the next three classes will be on a group of themes, okay, because they are all connected to each other. And probably we'll have the test at the end of the fourth class rather than at the end of the four classes.

Also, so if you wanted to meet it, so you can think about it, we can come at the line: citizenship control. Because last semester and semesters before that, you guys would say, then somebody would suddenly come to the room and say, "You know, but actually I did not want to SJA. I am forced to do it." I mean, not, "I am forced to do it."

So we are a little more concentrated with each other, have a little bit, you know, you need to really have—I mean, I can individually do polling, but I would rather you guys do it in order to place yourself on the ladder. It really wasn't a funny thing to say. Nobody can be third.

If you keep the test for the third class, then we have two speeds. So maybe the second or fourth class is better than the third. I don't care much if it is a fun speed. It is a control. Yeah, actually, one makes me think of a desert cutoff; it's ungrateful. I mean, especially with me, it's something I agree to be in that drive.
