This city felt very important about moving the shadows. All the classrooms in my math, because every single class I was uncomfortable with fresh air, the smell of old. And then both doing like our second thing.

So we are going into the learning of this particular qualities, which is very interesting. Sorry, but I just wanted to address a couple of things before that, which stemmed from a couple of people asking me about studying for all samples of protocol.

The entire reminder of PKHS thinking and knowing in the human sciences is that you get a diverse set of—you get to know what the other disciplines are, which is very similar. In any other domain, you are introduced to understanding fields that exist.

As you know from your faculty introductions, there are many faculty who have shifted completely from engineering, drawn towards social science research objectives. I do not have the same expectations of you at all. That is not for the purpose of PKHS, international political science, or international economic science. It's just so that we get a foundation in a variety of disciplines, which many of your peers do not have.

A simple example that I like to give is when I go to—I think I used this in class before—but when I interview a designer of a government platform who has absolutely no idea about what economic principles are or about what public participation is, he is designing an app for public participation.

And so this is a hope that, considering the diverse range of things you all will end up with, you at least have certain conceptual ideas, certain informed decisions you will make about society, about economy, about decision-making, et cetera.

So there are broadly two sets of things that these courses are doing. One is they are compulsory because, as a part of decisions, it's expected that you know what other decisions are. And second, that in some—it is not evident right now, but hopefully, at some point in the future, in the next four years and after, you will have some sort of real—about how some of these conceptions might be helpful in your work.

It's not that you're daily going to be utilizing them, but they will hopefully shape in some way what you do in your career, for example.

And which is why I stress that I don't want you to have a definition of state or a definition of citizen according to this person, written in 1873 or 1934, because that is not what classical political scientists would do.

But instead, the way that I teach something that is disciplinary is: you take your concepts and your ideas. I'm never asking you to define, or I'm never asking you to really base it in an academic history and something like this.

When it comes to your tests, when it comes to the evaluations, all that you are doing is—we are saying whether you are catching up with the conception that we are looking at in class.

Like last time, when he said, “But what's the point of this ladder?” If it gets quickly through that, on one hand, I thought having such a cleanly demarcated, laid-out, clean is what engineers love, right? As opposed to these vague notions of what citizenship is.

But of course, there are different ways of looking at it. So I constantly like to remind myself that I have taught law students, I have taught science students, I have taught social science students, and everybody perceives differently.

So I never would have a direct answer to, “What is the point of all of this?” It's very realistic, but there is no point for anything, actually, to look at it in the long run, in your life.

But the hope is that it in some way contributes to your conception of the world, it in some way contributes to the work that you can do, and there's a tiny, tiny sliver—some 0.0005% safer—that one of you will turn out to be a social scientist at the end of ten years, which then really happens, and that's perfectly fine.

Those are the first important audience. Does anybody have any—if you want to express your discomfort at political science, at social science, at disciplinarity, at the nonsense you have been made to do, feel free to express it. It's perfectly fine.

This is a sales case. It's not like I'm going to judge you for your ideas or your knowledge. And I'm saying because if you need to understand any of these ideas and I'm doing a bad job, then I need to sort of reinvent or remold the way that I use them.

So, if there are any questions, this is a good time to ask this question. Or feelings, or desires.

Where did this come from? No, because I mean, you went checklist, then somebody else came to me after class and said, “Yeah, but I don't know.”

So three, four people spoke about what is the purpose. And so, for example...

I have different ideas for when to teach certain things. As I was mentioning last time, sometimes it's perhaps good to have just very broad disciplinary introductions in the first level. I think it's good to know the history of the world before knowing the history of India. You know, teach it twice in person or something. So it just comes from introspection. It's good to introspect. But also, it's going to cause some of you to ask me such questions.

Okay, anybody's on board with reading and learning in your social science? Thinking in the social science.

So the next thing was: we are going to do all of these over today's class and the next two classes. Today, we are exclusively going to deal with power, and we are not looking at the other things. We will use certain reports, but conceptually, we are going to do the first thing and not the other thing. Which means that if the test stands as it is, it will leave only a top. And then in the next two weeks, it will be two of these concepts that I will tell you which concepts will be there.

While in the first quarter classes we were talking about what is politics and how do we study politics, historically there are big papers. So we see, like, for example, there is this Irish APM like Of Politics and the Study of Government and the Study of State and the Study of State and Citizen, etc. However, there have been a large group of people who say politics is power. If we are studying politics, all we are studying is power and the way that it manifests. You look at the state practicing power on its citizens, how it controls its citizens, how different institutions, like the police, like the military, like the judiciary, practice power. How countries behave with each other is seen through a lens of power, right? I mean, we always talk of America as a superpower, India as the rising power, so on and so forth. We use that kind of vocabulary.

And so, within the domain, inasmuch as a big part of the discipline and a big part of the approach has been to study governments and citizenship and state, etc., part is predominantly concerned with the way power manifests.

And this has to be understood because it's a concept that we, of course, have colloquial ideas about, which means you and I generally know what power is, but we need to look at it a little more technically, a little more relatively, a little more in terms of applications, because it's not as big as it is itself.

What we are going to do is look at how the idea of power has shifted from the 1800s to the present day. That's one thing that we will do. We will, of course, try to identify characteristics of power, but we will also look at what are the manifestations and practices and processes of power. How does it act? Actually, both. And as I said, there are strong linkages to these three other terms that are put out there, but for the sake of today's class, I'm going to go to the next slide, have some sort of narrative. We won't jump into them, but maybe we'll at least touch upon them to lay the grounds for the next couple of classes.

Okay, so let's start with your views on what you know or what you think you know about power. So if I say that, how do we use the term power in our everyday conversations? That's my question. What are contexts in which you may use the phrase power? And just to clarify, we are not talking about, like, realistic power.

Okay. So the ruling political party which has formed the government—we say the government which has power, right? The government in power currently. So the idea that the government seems to be manifested with some power, seems to have some embedded power. So in reality, it doesn't matter which political party gets there; when they get there, they have the power to do something that the government is able to do. So there is one idea that you are suggesting: power lies within government.

Okay, cool. What else?

Power ties violence within people.

Power is—okay, power can be violent. I'm not putting military factor because violence can be in various ways. I do have a military factor.

Okay. Making decisions for others rather than somebody, and perhaps government is one way of looking at that.

Characteristic?

Okay. What else?

Power works beyond government, starts at the household, and it's like the everyday societal structure.

Okay, so you are saying that power is there in social institutions. And you said household and other social institutions. You want to quite understand any social thing ultimately has some sort of—from household, what are the social institutions in that?

I mean, institutions.

Okay, no workplace.

Okay, what else?

So the markets, to a certain extent?

Okay, I guess markets as having served a mean space. So I'm going to put one of social institutions.

Okay, so apart from the government, you are saying there is another set of power with the judiciary, and this power you are interpreting as interpretation of constitution put you in jail. That's two examples. What else is power?

Having more money means more power. Having more money is more power. Okay, so you are now identically suggesting power-lizing social classes. There's a nice song on both ESMB for more money on problems, but I hope it is interesting. Okay, but you are saying more money, more power. That's what I have written. Okay, what else?

Power is recognized trust. Recognized trust. Trust. That's an odd phrase. I'm going to put it there. We will look at it closely. But there's something stuck in the way that we better. Okay, so that please actually manage trust speeds.

I think if you look at all these examples, SIG is not an example of a politician representing a society. And although I do not want him making decisions for me, he does end up, I think, making the decision for a society. So, looking broader, even if it's two people in a room, if there's a certain recognition that I recognize, or, you know, there's some—if I say somebody has more power over me, I think I recognize them as having more power. So that's the first half of it. And for trust, it's the societal thing. So let's say they tell people to decide how positive is arranged, and I can say it's trust means.

Okay, and I'm just throwing out an idea.

Sure, sure. So you are suggesting—I am just giving another way of putting it—you are suggesting power is some sort of recognition between social relations. So, when you say that you and the parliament member, for example, there is a social relation with you, and you recognize that that person has power.

Me or who has power?

Yeah. So essentially, you are saying that it is a recognition that within a hierarchy, somebody has power over me. But then if it goes beyond that definition, when they are making decisions for you, that's where the trust part comes.

Okay, so I am going to put decision making, but I'm not—at trust I'll just put it in back that it is. So I don't know if this comes under power because it's not like a conflict idea. But having good number of people under your influence, like having influenced a lot more people, also does mean it has a lot of power, even though they might not.

Is that the person who's interested in how old are you? Like, people do—people who make large gatherings and also other.

Okay, so you are saying there is one particular word that you use, which is influence. But the other thing that you said is that a person or individual may have influence over a large number of people. How do you define large?

I'm just thinking relatively. A person who has the larger influence is more powerful, aspect of it.

Okay, so you're saying in relative terms, somebody is always more powerful than the other, something like that?

Something. Like there is a hierarchy of power.

Okay. So the idea of hierarchy goes very close to the idea of social relations because we seem to suggest that women, for example—take their example—that I may have power over this class, but the dean of academics has power over all the classes, but the director has power over the dean of academics and therefore everything else under there. That's what I'm trying to suggest. There is hierarchical spread within.

But I think in the sense of normal, if they have absolute mothering, you cannot question their power.

Absolutely, just a solid mother. They kind of keep changing.

So you are suggesting that power does not need to be violent. It can be soft, it can be influentialistic, right? So it doesn't need to take militaristic forms, it doesn't need to take policy forms. But you are talking about some kind of influence.

All right, okay. You wanted to say something? Okay. Anybody else?

So power is, I think, that you can influence your will or your will or something once other helps, regardless of whether—

Okay, this is very widely quoted in all the textbooks, and I'm glad you're quoting textbooks now. Make sure that you're reading it. That's a great thing. So this is generally what is seen as a definition of power: power is your ability to achieve your objectives, regardless of whether there is opposition or not.

So let's rephrase that again. Let's reorganize that a little bit. Power seems to suggest the ability to achieve objectives regardless of opposition.

Typically, the first part is what was historically considered as power. Even in these kinds of ideas, we are suggesting this top-down notion that person A practices power over person B, or institution A practices power within individuals within that institution, or there is a hierarchy of power. So, if somebody has power and somebody has lesser power, then this person is practicing something which this person has more of, and we are fighting a battle against.

But there is something called Max Weber, and Weber says that, look, it's not that these institutions or individuals are really—they may be at the top of the hierarchy—but let us not assume that people within that hierarchy do not have the power to resist. And this is in a variety of ways. This can be in the way that the institution creates certain laws and you find, or you try to find, ways of circumventing those laws, right? You try to do this. How do you do it? When somebody tells you this is what needs to be done and these are the rules, and to follow these rules, do you follow all of them blindly? You try to circumvent it, right? You try to make your day around attendance policy, you try to make your day around credits and all that like this. You try to make your way around what you are actually supposed to do.

Now, the ability to, regardless of whatever sort of opposition there is, achieve those ends—the ability to achieve those objectives—can be considered as a true practice of power. And this is generally a textbook understanding that most political science and sociology textbooks will tell you: this is fundamentally what we can see as power.

How do we objectively make it something really tangible? I'm not going to use the phrase “outcomes” as well. There is a certain end you imagine, there is a certain goal you have in your mind, and reaching those goals can be considered as a good practice of power.

So, to go from what we said: if the government can make decisions for others regardless of opposition, then we say the government is a powerful government. We can say that whether the practice is through violence or whether the practice is through negotiation and conversation, as long as you are achieving your objectives, it is perfectly fine. So that is also a practice of power.

Whether there are individuals or whether there are institutions, there is this notion that each individual and institution has its own objectives, has its own clear vision of what it wants and what it means, and achieving those can be seen as a practice of power. And so the examples of policing, or judiciary, or universities work because they know that anyone would want to avoid prison, would want to avoid following the rules that they do not agree with, etc. But as long as those goals are met, power has been calculated.

If I introduce an arbitrary rule to ensure that everybody is paying attention in class, where a lot of them are saying that you are not allowed to play or some shit like that, because that's my interpretation of paying attention, and you navigate that in various ways, and you stare at me blankly for one and a half hours without believing me, but you choose not to pay attention and you choose not to remember anything, then one would say that you are pushing back against power. But even though you have done exactly what I want you to do, my power has not been fulfilled because you have rejected what I truly set out as my objective.

Look at it. It's a terrible example, and I'm inspiring what you have built up. What is it? I may use violence, I may use non-violence, I may use rules, I may use something as methods of trying to practice power over you. But all of those are just means of achieving the end; all of those are just processes of trying to achieve the objective of power, even though I may not fully reach them. But you may have enough power to implement it by that.

Sure, but that's the point here: what is my objective? Is my objective for you to get dry eyes, or is my objective for you to learn something? If my objective for you is to learn something, and I choose a process which I think is the best process for you to learn something, and you still do not learn, clearly it's a failed process.

Remember that when we—this is one of the big things that was said about non-violence—that is said about non-violence, the state will try to practice power over you by being violent towards you. The colonizer, the oppressor, the dictator will constantly try to force you to bend to that will by using violence. And non-violence seems to suggest that by not being violent, you will reduce the power of the state, because at one point the state will realize that beating the data is not a way to conform, to get two people to conform. Does that make sense?

So think of it as the means to the end and another idea.

Siddharthi wanted to say something. When we say that the government is in power, what if, at a particular point in time, they are not able to fulfill their objective by sheer force? Are they still in power in that exact moment, or is that—

Okay, so that is a good example to separate the colloquial understanding of power from a scientific understanding of power. The colloquial understanding of power suggests that, when we say that the political party has the power, has the chief power in the government, we are merely suggesting that they have the required numbers to form the government. Once they have the required numbers to form the government, it is expected that they have—and I am introducing another term carefully—the authority to govern.

Okay, so far, so good. The question you are asking is that somebody has formed a government and somebody has set out a series of objectives for that government, and those objectives are not fulfilled. Then can we call the government powerful or not?

The colloquial explanation is yes, the government is still in power, because they will not be voted out. But whether the government is powerful enough to reach its ends, you will say no. It has not reached the objective that it has set out for itself. The existence of the institution is not enough to practice power.

Do you agree that the police have policing powers? Do you agree with the statement that the traffic police have policing powers? Do Hyderabadi citizens consider the police to have power at signals?

Well, it is kind of 15 signals. What are you nodding? They do not care about the policeman. They do whatever the hell they want. Traffic police is supposed to regulate traffic. So, having a free-flowing, rule-bound citizen that follows all rules and regulations and follows all traffic laws—if that condition is fulfilled, then yes, indeed, the policeman has fulfilled their capacity of power. But they have the power to do so; whether they have achieved their ability to practice the power is not really there.

Please, but okay, let me, because there are some questions, replace this and try to answer it in that way. If somebody has the ability to do a task, has power, and has certain objectives or outcomes, he is in power as long as he possesses the ability to carry those out. Whether he carries them out or not, and whether they are achieved or not, is a different question. But that possession of the ability is what power should be.

So, even if you take the example of a party, they say a party comes to power within some structure. Then they possess the ability to make these changes, not necessarily achieve them, but to make a difference.

So, it is precisely the distinction between the colloquial understanding and the scientific understanding. When we say somebody is invested with power, it is a very colloquial understanding. It is saying that this person has the ability to do something. But a true practice of power is when you actually fulfill that ability.

As long as you are standing there and you have the ability to say, “You can’t leave for an hour and a half,” that is all I have. Is it really? But if you get up and go away, if you say, “Exclude the teacher out of this situation in this class,” and you walk out and go to Sandeep and say, “This is a good idea,” then I do not have the power to make a decision, whether it is an objective or an outcome.

If I walk away, you use the authority. Again, today, we exercise certain measures, whether you achieve it or not. But that is precisely the point: what is the purpose of having power if you are unable to achieve your objectives?

Or rather, let me rephrase it: if you are unable to achieve your objectives, you truly are not in power.

Follow-up question: How do we truly know someone's objectives?

For a public institution like a government, those objectives are spelled out in the form of laws: “You shall not drive under…”

What if there are objectives which I am not working on?

No, he is saying, for example, the US invaded Afghanistan, saying it is because there is a dictator, but the actual objective was to gain all the oil in Afghanistan, right? So, that is essentially what people would argue and say: the US might have military power, but its actual objective is something else.

Now, whether the US manages to achieve command over Afghanistan’s oil supply is a way of suggesting why the US is the superpower. That ability to get things declared and undeclared is actually an important part of power itself.

They jumped in ahead a little bit earlier, but it does not need to be a very important thing. It does not need to be an obviously stated thing. With the government or the police, this can be an obviously stated thing, which is why I gave the example.

But a true practice of power, and there is precisely it that the US would go ahead and do whatever the head is wanted in Afghanistan and India, is because regardless of the opposition from the UN, from multiple public and international organizations, it just goes ahead and does whatever it wants.

So there is someone—we'll come to that in a second—who helps identify who suggests that power is not as neat as this looks. Okay, so I'll come to that in a second.

Um, but we'll also have a hand. Yeah, oh yeah, so it doesn't have one. And saying the figure, what the first power should be, is secondary to another thing. So you can just have the option to have a—if I choose, I will not care about the bias there. I don't know how to feed him up and for whatever outcome that may be. If I choose not to feed him up, that doesn't mean I can—and I couldn't read it from that. So I could actually have the power to meet up the game.

For example, currently there is a hundred night, right? So I could say that the government—you could say that the Indian government had lost power in the sense because they had. But if they really wanted to make a movement, that does not imply it at all. And so I don't think there are a rule of laws in the world.

Okay, so I commend the thinking and child to the resignation of the Minister companies. But that's also another thing: namely, one may be endowed with power, but one may not practice it.

Before you suggest that, which goes hand in hand with Siddharth's point, there are institutions or individuals who may have the power to do something, but if it is not manifested in reaching the objectives, why are we saying they don't have power?

I take it back. Simple example of, let's say, King Darwin. So, I mean, if we say that he possesses power over his citizen and even one of their friends are walking away, his outcome still, right? So, I mean, it is object certain.

So, if even one of his people, let's say, just walks across the border, he kills them, he is redemption for it, they walk away and he loses his power. So, as well, that he knows he has suddenly lost power.

No, as long as he takes the action, again, as long as he drives the object of, you know, keeping his fear or killing the person or doing anything, he still holds power. So, again, it went back to our.

Sure, but I'm going further and saying that even if the citizen goes away, him in terms may no longer have the power over that particular citizen, but still has power over multiple other citizens.

At their class, or who's responsible for the gas or something, will be taken. Sure, he kept trying out, with the objective of healing of your since fall 1984 kind of situation, and at the end of the day he has achieved his objective. That's the situation where if what people exercise or what you do, and there will be some things where people exercise or what you feel about.

Sorry, confusing. But pull up. What is the Joint Security Area, which is set at the border between market and are clear? And so, like, it's a mystery, but it's kind of saying that in this good example, if people wanted to exercise power but not red to work, there's regularly saying that people could exercise power, but yet—but even in the example of the fire or drug set, and if you look at profile.

So, apart from our polarity, there is something holding you back from treating the content. So, working with the white white, and there will be this kind of treatment. I think that's a thing where if you beat up the child, you achieve your objective.

See, that's a big—this idea that the practice of violence is by itself the practice of power is a limited idea. That's the music of the example, I don't know.

No, no. See, that's exactly what I'm stretching out a little bit. Merely practicing violence, merely practicing control over a citizenship, is not necessarily what power is. It is one manifestation of power, or it is one instance of power, but it is not a larger conceptual idea of what power really is.

So, for instance, you may want to beat up a child to make sure that no children come near you. That is your objective. You may want to beat up a child to, I don't know, re-invoke conversation in society about capital punishment. So there are a variety of reasons why you would beat up a child.

If you are beating up a child, you are a child of a child because you want to become a child, and that's your objective, you are a silo, you are a social partner.

So let's not look at what is the reduced action on the power. What is the purpose of that objective is something that we need to understand.

And therefore, out of that group of ten children, there will be more children who lunch away than five children. So you can't just say, okay, child, and you in the room start at it with what you're doing, so that makes sense.

I like the directions in which your mind wanders, but while going to the moment, you can see the At answer, you want to contribute something. You can enjoy a little discussion. I would rather hear from other people than from me. Somewhere you can do something.

So, you can't actually make the person into what you want. Your objective can't be moved and then that person wants to do it. Okay, but there are instances where you can control people's minds even if you are not present.

You walk into a housing society, or you walk into a social area with a member of the other gender, an opposite sex, and you automatically do not hold hands. You automatically do not show affection because you are punching the merit that there is somebody who might be watching you. That is your point of interstate, not some kind of interesting.

But who has evoked that mental state within you? Society, not government. Society may not be constantly present to determine how you behave and how you act, but clearly your mind has worked in a different direction because society has pushed it in a different direction.

So it's not necessary that an individual needs to be present through a specific action to have a certain outcome. I mean, this is essentially what we say about patriarchy or about social structures: they don't need to—that, yes, the enforcing of the Burivat or the Panda is a practice of patriarchal power, certainly. But it's not the only way in which patriarchy manifests itself.

On what you should study, there are things that are not told to you, but things that are expected of you, that society at large, family, and extended family place around you. And these do not manifest, saying that there is no one holding your hand and saying, “Hey, Chalo, Guru,” you know. But basically, you know these are the expect social expectations that some people have.

But they still manage to—it's not easy to break social forms of control or social forms of power. But the practice can be without the active presence of it, which is why my problem with Siddhanta and Abdullah's examples of individuals practicing power upon another individual, or a leader practicing power upon somebody else, or a higher over a leader.

We seem to suggest that power is located within individuals. We seem to suggest that power is located within the hierarchy of a leader, a principal, a director, a dean, et cetera, et cetera. That it has to be within a police team.

But what I am trying to suggest is there are other ways in which power is practiced, which is not necessarily manifested into specific actions, specific individuals, et cetera. We come to categorizing it, but I am just pushing you to look beyond that incident approach for understanding of power.

So if you stay in the middle of the element—obviously change the market, and then here's the automatic. So your original—so as long as the receiver or lack or whatever is changing their behavior, regardless of how the person or institution practicing power is doing it, you are saying as long as the behavior is altered, power has been completed. Right?

Okay. Any other questions or contributions?

Okay, so let's try to organize this little bit into a meaningful way of looking at power.

Yes. Okay. So that's the idea of all of them.

Because, but is it the child's objective to be view multiple words? So if it is not the child's objective, then it's actually your objective, that you do not want to expose the child to sports.

I mean, judging from my nephew and niece, they love to learn passwords, and they don't want to use them, but they'll make fun of me and say children send backwards or something like that. But ideally, I mean, you and I made those conscious decisions because we are altering our own behavior because we do not want the child to be affected.

Yeah. So it's our decision, so it's our practice, not the children's. So is it we want to do the society which is influencing us the child?

Okay, so take it forward back. This idea that the individual has that children should not be exposed to cuss words, is it actually the individual sector that has society medicine in this particular way?

That's a good question to ask, and this is in fact connected to going back to the debates on campus, that some of the emails indicated that the campus community should not be exposed to something, right? Which means that there are social basic. There are social expectations about what individuals and groups should do, should have access to, et cetera, et cetera.

That someone somewhere tries to practice power by making groups of individuals being discerned. And those social expectations, that is something that we often refer to as reproduction of power.

So there are multiple criticisms of—there are multiple studies that show that the propagation of patriarchy is not only by men, but it's also by women.

There are women who continue practicing that power. And that immediately shows that power can be remanifested in various ways within its constituents. And this is a big thing that some approaches to power help us make: yes, what we consider as social expectations, what we consider as social norms, at what age you are supposed to get married, at what age you are supposed to have children, what kind of jobs you should be doing, what kind of language you should be speaking in front of whom. These are definitely social practices of our—yeah, that's certain.

Okay, so let's get this into a structured analytic exercise. So, is there this large definition that we look at power as the ability to realize outcomes regardless of opposition?

This is a bit neutral in the sense that it does not suggest whether it is violent or non-violent. It does not suggest whether it includes individuals, institutions, etc. So, this is vague enough and large enough that it can encompass any definition of power. So, any example you want to give of practice of power can easily be analyzed through this particular lens. Do we agree with this?

Okay. So, as long as the fundamental is clear, then we can move forward. The second thing that scholars of power within sociology and within politics argue is power is automatically a relationship. It's always the relationship between two sets of actors. And this relationship therefore can be understood as the relationship between individuals, the relationship between institutions and individuals, and groups and individuals.

The reason we are putting institutions and groups separately is because institutions have to be seen as formalized groups. So, the University is a group of people, but it is a formal set of who the people are and it's defined, right? So, an institution automatically means a formal, identifiable group, while here a group can mean a religious group, a social group, a political group, an economic group—whatever you want to call it. So, this can be a little vague, while this can be a bit more precise and this is a bit more formal.

So, if you are looking at government-citizen relationships, you would put it in institutions and individuals. If you are looking at it as, I don't know, the relationship between a religious majority and a religious minority, we would look at it in terms of a group, right? So, here or there, it can be—it need not be individual, but it can be looked at on the side of the root of the details. And you can make various interpretations of combinations of institutions versus groups and things like this.

But essentially, the key thing to recognize is power actually seen in the sense of a relationship. It's a big part of social relationships, it's a big part of economic relationships, political relationships. So, this is part one, looking at how do we really define power. Two, this is looking at how do we understand power in actual terms, to understand it as a relationship between these two terms.

Okay, the third thing that I want to do is how does power manifest? Which means what forms does it take and what changes does it take. But before we look at the manifestation of power, I am just going to do a quick transformation of how power has been understood through history, technically understood through history as well.

So, we're going to look at two approaches. One is Max Weber, and the other is Michel Foucault. Max Weber is German; he is writing in the late 1800s. Michel Foucault is writing in the 1970s in France. And I'm talking about the dates just so that you can see the evolution of ideas also.

So, when have you guys done introduction to sociology in this cases? Okay, are you doing it right now? Yes, okay. Are you looking at things like structuralism, post-structuralism? Yeah? No? Okay, that's fine. Have you come across Max Weber yet? Okay. But Pegas has read a function on Max Herbert. Max has some responses to Weber, of course. Yeah. But do you know what you are going to study with Weber? Sorry, what exactly you are going to be studying with Max Weber?

The book that we are referring to mostly talks about rationalization and rationalization. Perfect, right? So, Max Weber was very interested in how institutions function, how individuals and institutions function. There is also a time when this part of the world has moved from monarchy into slightly more modern states. And he is writing in Germany and he is very deeply interested in the question of how institutions run things, how governments run things.

So, Max Weber has some foundational ideas with which he contributes to debates around individuals and institutions, how organizations work, and how bureaucracies work. So, he is very interested in this question of what is the process by which something takes place.

And he is looking around him, and he is looking at a German state. He is looking at a state which is running like a machine. And he wants to understand how this machine achieves its objectives. How does the government reach its goals? How does the country stay together, maintain its economy, maintain its growth, so on and so forth?

So this is the worldview of Weber that I just wanted to let you know. Now, Weber also—that is why we studied a lot, largely in sociology apart from political science—realizes that this is not only a question of bureaucracy and government, but it is also a question of society. How does a society run? How does society have certain processes? How do we arrive at certain rules of marriage? How do we arrive at certain rules of caste? These are things that Weber is interested in. So he is looking at modern societies and how they are organized.

So, just to report, Weber is somebody who adds this part to the earlier part. So the older Greek and Greek part remains sort of limited to this kind of idea that the ability to achieve the objectives is power. But Weber says that there will be opposition to power. However, overcoming that opposition is what power really is.

And so, because Weber is so interested in organizations and institutions, he identifies that power tends to come from social relations. He says—and this is the other contribution from Weber—that if you truly look at who has the power, he makes the connection that people who have wealth and people who have knowledge seem to always be more powerful. And he said that he gives the examples of religion, he gives the example of the state, he gives the example of royal families, of noble families, et cetera. Those that are endowed with—

If you look probably not at the institution itself, but we need to look at what the relationship is to the institution. We do not need to look at patriarchy versus society, but we need to look at how exactly patriarchy manifests in smaller ways, which continues to practice this.

And that example that I gave of the neighbourhood boggling into an—

I distinctly remember talking about the panopticon at one point of time in this class. I was remembering the class. Fuck up, panopticon? No? Last semester? Last semester. You guys don't remember anything about the past. Because his name is so weird sounding, of course I remember it. But when there's other things, even more weird sounding. But panopticon. There's panopticon, they're all seeing that the transcript.

So there was a prison model that was proposed and uses this to make this argument about power and practice of power, objectives, et cetera.

And the prison is built in a circle, and it has open doors, okay. So you can leave it if you want. And there is a tower in the middle. From the top of the tower, you can see into every cell. But from the cells, you can't see into the tower. And the idea is that in this prison, people will behave themselves because they are constantly watched.

Now Foucault says, regardless of whether there is a person inside the tower or not, people will continue to behave in a certain way because they expect that there is somebody watching them. And if they try to break the rules, then they will be shot into the tower and they will be killed.

I would use this example to say that society works in a similar way: we don't necessarily have people watching us all the time, we don't have people reading us all the time. That this classical idea of the—feel Udan. Have you seen Udan? Uda. Yeah. That this classical idea that the father will be to the son will do life, following the norms of society. But Foucault is, you know, it doesn't have to be that way. There are enough people—forget the power meeting and optimistic. There are enough things in society that the kid, while, I don't know, schooling through Reddit and watching reels on Instagram, will himself behave in a certain way because it is expected for him to behave. We don't require actual practice of power.

And this therefore becomes—Foucault therefore introduces new methods for studying power, which we will get into.

After Foucault's very simple argument is this: the definition stays the same, but this opposition has to be understood in different ways. It's not a simplistic exercise of the top three pushing against a water, but there are also negotiations between individuals, between groups, between institutions, et cetera. All of us learn to navigate these structures of power because we ourselves have power endowed within us that stays within us.

We will stop now, or rather, let me quickly put forth, because we have two and a half minutes left. So, the manifestations of power: power is definitely seen as agenda-setting. I'll explain each one in a second. It is definitely seen as influencing behaviors. It is definitely seen as decision-making.

Power as power can be legitimate, or it can be illegitimate. Practice of power. And we will come to that idea of legitimacy. Power can be... I will be in... Yeah, so agenda setting is, I think, the same thing: determine what the goals are for everybody else. That is sometimes too powerful because defining what this country should be, defining what this society should be. Imagine one person introduces an idea of society and everybody starts believing in the idea. That is like a grand agenda setting taking place.

When Peggy's fought back against Iyanj's recommendation of starting class early, Ayaj was trying to do agenda setting, right? But there's pushback, like saying, "No, you cannot set that agenda," give it sticks usually.

Influencing behaviour: me giving you carrots and sticks to pay attention in class, do well, do all right. I think I'm trying to influence your behaviour. That's me trying to influence... That's me practicing power.

The power of decision making: whether you believe it or not, whether you agree or not, SRD Boga, that is true power also. Demonetization is a great example of decision making, regardless of what people say. People not want to do a rolling airline. H steam ruling, the ability to make that decision is definitely legitimate to authenticate this time.

Sovereign goes to a more structural idea of power, that power can be harvestable and there can be a level above which there is no power. And the level above which there is no power is through something in power. So whether you want to look at the US, whether you want to look at BOD, whether you can identify a big specific individual who seems to get away with everything, that would be somewhere in problem.

Yeah. Okay. Are there any final questions or clarifications? Cool. Okay. So next class we'll have a small test on this. And, uh, answer, please, you can get done with my face in the middle. That's why you want to remember the knowledge that I just have for you.

Yeah, and then we'll start looking at authoritarian obligation legitimacy, because then it's directly connected to the idea of power and how power is the batches, right?

All right, I'll see you on Tuesday. Yes, I'm doing it.
