Last time, we started talking about citizenship dimension, and I'll try to formally organize that into what needed their thinking about citizenship. And I left you with a question last time, no? What I'm asking to answer somebody? Okay, nobody remembers when I'm talking to the student.

Okay, so there are two specific questions that we're talking about: citizenship and citizenship, which we'll try to answer. The first is the question of who is a citizen. So, in other words, how do you define or how do you characterize who is a citizen? That's the first level of question.

The second level of question is the what question: What does citizenship entail? It means that, in the answer to this, who is a citizen? And our answer last time, in various and tenuous ways, was the citizen is some kind of a member of a country, of a state. Then the second question we need to ask is, what does this membership mean? It's not only about membership; it's about the answer. There are two ways of looking at citizenship.

Okay, so generally, try to avoid looking at the first five minutes of class, the last five minutes of the day. And by that time, there's a lot of patients and energy. So we're going to try and answer these questions. So those two are there. I'm just emphasizing that I'm talking about citizenship.

The first question we ask is, who is a citizen? The second question we ask is, what does citizenship entail? So it's one following from the other. That's defining, that's trying to identify processes, trying to identify specific roles, et cetera, et cetera. We can put that down as well.

And last session, we had this question of who should be a member. And just for the sake of revision, let us try to put that down again. So the first line is the born-into-the-land kind of citizen, which is what American citizenship or Indian citizenship at independence was. So anyone born in the directory can consider.

The second A is what were other men? Yeah, so lineage, which also, I mean, there are Latin terms for it, which I'm not going to do. But if you're born to citizens, you're not a bad citizen.

Does the question of citizenship, is it as, like, necessarily having the same answers online? Do you think half of the answer we give, they want to, like, better plans? Like, even how about, like, democratic corporations? Maybe you're born with a good kind of name or capitalist kind of name. Maybe it transcends, like, maybe a little more kind of care, or the fact that someone's probably deserve more than, like, rights and money. Maybe you're not capitalist kind of ideas in a monolithic state works better. So is the thing we can actually answer? Or I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I don't want to be very basic.

No, so because we are doing political science and, again, politics, we are looking at a larger conceptual theoretical application based. And the reason I for certain things that tend to be more in the example, so it works very well for other things that don't be.

Like, in India, we have a planning debate on citizenship. It was even before the Constitution was written. So there are these interesting parts of the Constituent Assembly debate where somebody says, you know, somebody makes this hypothetical: What if a pregnant woman comes on a plane and a child is born in India? And people say that child should be Indian. Then somebody says, oh, what if somebody goes to Pakistan, but they decide to come back after three years and want to settle down back in India? And there's a debate about that.

So right from the moment of constitution, there is a definition on who the citizen is. And that definition has evolved quite significantly. And there are very visible junctures at which this evolution takes place.

Similarly, even if you look at a country like the United States, the United States has a very singular idea of citizenship when it comes to actual practice of citizenship. There are many differences in that.

If I can see, like, viewers qualify for citizenship, like, they actually do, you know, if someone has exams and stuff like that, I'm not a university student, you know, if that's what I said, I'm not a university student, I'm not a university student, from the American side of the story, it's the same thing.

Yeah, so when you come to, I'll come to those in a second. And the earlier part of that goes into the what question, so we'll go to the what part of that.

So, on the one, I mean, lineage is some way of defining who the citizen is. Beyond this, there are others as well. So the simple one is what's called naturalization. Have you ever heard of this phrase before? Do you have what is naturalization?

You live in a country for, like, five years, 10 years, and then you learn the language, you learn the—

Yeah, it's like if you live long enough. It depends on the country. Sometimes it's five, sometimes it's 12, sometimes it's 15.

Naturalization, and you start, you learn the language, you're treated as a citizen. Naturalization is you have naturally become a part of the community, and further the test, the process, and all of that. But that's another pathway to become a citizen, right? In this, it is even most automatically granted. In this, it is more an acquired process, because you need to apply for a community.

Similarly, there is something known as regularization or registration, which is slightly different from naturalization. Naturalization, you tend to show that you're integrated into the country, and that's why you deserve to be a citizen. In regularization, registration is a more formalized process, which doesn't have to do with language tests and things like this, but it depends on how much time you have spent, whether you registered with the United States or not, et cetera, et cetera. So think of this as a little more formal, and that as a little more cultural.

But, for example, in India, if you arrive as a student who are developing degree or higher degree, you will live for a few years, you get a job, et cetera, et cetera. The path for you is registration. I think seven years, 12 years is the qualification in India, but you can become a citizen because you've lived and worked. We don't do citizenship tests, we don't test language and things like this, which would go under naturalization. There are many other qualifications and things like this, but it's not, yeah, it's a process, it's a laid-out process. Then, of course, there is...

So, you know, producing is an aberration and it's a more legal thing. So these four are, I'm just raising for the sake of clarity, but generally these four things really define who the citizen is. Now, which also means that there are two conceptions of citizenship. Would anyone identify two distinct ways in which this works?

Either things like, so difference between your family, so getting a bond from your parents or getting the right constitution.

Okay, familial versus procedural. Any other thing?

No?

Should I repeat the text? I'm not typing.

Maybe culturally you are kind of integrated?

So think about that a little bit more. How do you phrase that? Should I say it differently from the previous sentence?

Now, the first part, born of citizenship, whereas the other part is chosen citizenship.

Like you can choose citizenship, but you are forced to be a citizen.

Actually, you don't force anyone to be a citizen in that sense. You are speaking upon it.

You are not forced to be a citizen, but it is imposed upon you.

Yes, okay, it is imposed. I was going to cut when you said it was imposed, but yes, that makes sense.

That's something that is there, well, something is a part of it.

But another kind of distinction that we used, the same kind of distinction we talked about semester 2 and last semester when we were talking about certain things.

Like this seems to present some kind of naturalized citizenship. Like you don't need to go through a process, you don't need to go through acquisition. It seems to assume that anyone for some reason born within this boundary automatically naturally acquires the right citizenship.

And I'm just using it for the sake of sort of distinguishing it, that this is a bit more procedural, it's a bit more formal, it's a bit more about rules and regulations, while these are more about your sense of belonging and who you are, where you come from, et cetera. That's what I mentioned, actually, in my last statement.

Because remember that naturalization is actually a little bit between the two. Because naturalization seems to indicate that, oh, you have integrated so well with us that we now consider you almost as if you're living here, almost as if you're born here.

Like, for Germany, one of the big things about naturalization is language tests. You need to pass language proficiency tests. If you are not fluent in that language, you are not, so you can spend 30 years, 40 years, if you're not fluent, then you're not naturalized. And you're not good enough; you can never be a part of this community. But if you are good enough, then you are a part of that community, and your children will then benefit from this.

So it's just a way of imagining and separating, categorizing, not necessarily the absolute way of looking at it.

However, as we were discussing in the last class, a big part of this, all of these but mostly these two, is it gets stuck in loopholes. There are catch-22s, there are ironies, there are questionable legalities on who is born where and what kind of time, how do you really categorize lineage, how do you justify being born in a territory as a matter of citizenship, so going back to the example of a pregnant person coming in a plane and a child being born, how is that a good enough reason to give some issue with citizenship, right?

And what about disputed territories as well?

So this is something that is a big problem in this categorization of who the citizen should be.

So I have a very close friend from Tibet, and Tibet is not recognized as a country, so they don't have passports. Her parents came down from Tibet into the hills. Then she was born, and she didn't acquire Indian citizenship because she was born just on the cusp of 1987–1988, but she doesn't have a Tibetan passport. So she had this very flimsy travel document, which the Indian government issues, saying this person is of Tibetan origin and resides in India. So she realized that the best way to escape this trap, because she's not a citizen anywhere technically, was to apply to a university outside India and sort of use this naturalization registration process in order to get some sort of citizenship.

But she would describe this—I mean, she would describe this very emotionally. But certain things, like, you go to the place of birth on a university registration website, and you do a dropdown, and there's no Tibetan in this. Or place of origin of citizenship, or passport. So there's nothing that legitimately recognizes you as a citizen of anywhere.

And somehow, through some loopholes, she found that in France, you can register as a refugee without permanent status. So there's a group of people who are recognized as refugees without permanent status. India, by the way, hosts multiple thousands of refugees without permanent status, which means they can come and go out of India whenever they want. They are recognized as residents. And so she started that process, and she enrolled in a French university, and she slowly made her way into that. Also, it took her, like, 15 years to be naturalized as a French citizen and actively get the passport. But it meant everything. She could only travel within India and France, and she could not even travel to the neighboring countries for conferences and workshops and things like this. You can imagine what kind of life it would be, having a complete inability to go from place to place.

I don't know precisely Indian laws about it. Indian laws, of course, govern adoption. But generally, we don't do the white people who are going to a poorer country and trying to children from there. Most Indians get adoption income, right? Europeans adopt from around the world. I don't know about that. It's a nice hypothetical, but I don't know what would be the answer. But let's just don't do that. If you're considering adopting, you don't adopt from outside India. I'm sorry if you leave to adopt here.

So those with uncertain, from disputed territories, those without any kind of identification, are massively left out of the loop. The United Nations has certain declarations, and there are certain similarities that India has a signature on many different conventions about this. We are far more benevolent to outsiders than what the politics leads you to think. We are quite receptive. We have received refugees from Afghanistan, from Bangladesh, from Tibet, and from many other countries. But it's a process.

So while these two present all sorts of problems when it comes to defining who the citizen really is, these two are very clearly laid-out laws and processes. You can't end up in Canada on a random visa and stay there for 10 years and then decide that you want to be a citizen. You have to follow a very specific process in order to do this.

Yeah, sorry. Can it be said that both born and living can be viewed as an ideal community?

As an ideal community? Okay, what do you mean by community?

Representing the state as a community.

Okay, so there is something there. But right now, we are not asking what should a citizen do and what should a citizen be. Because what you're referring to, especially the communication part, goes into this part of the question. Right now, we are merely trying to identify who is defined as a citizen. What you're saying, the question that you're asking, has implications. When we come to this, we'll talk about that question, where we will see that citizenship means having to perform certain tasks. So just hold on to that. Yeah?

So in last class, when we proposed ideas like, say, someone should own land, someone should have lived in the country for X years, so those are also procedural ideas, those are also guidelines that you set out, okay, (mumbles). But how is that different from naturalization?

Okay, so those are very much a part of naturalization, regularization processes, but those are specific instances, which means naturalization in country A can be different from naturalization in country B, and regularization in country A can be different from regularization in country B. When you buy some bottles of whiskey, you get like one square foot of land in Scotland. They give you a little booklet which says you are now entitled to one square foot of land. Now, I'm not sure if it's a marketing gimmick, but there are certain— but you can't land up at Scotland and say, "I wanna be so poor of land," even though Scotland does have certain provisions for acquiring citizenship under property acquisitions or something. So those kind of things, whether it is ownership of property, whether it is contribution of taxes, whether it is being assimilated, they all fall into the lower group, but they are all variations of the group.

And you will see that, for example, learning a language is considered very, very differently. Some countries want you to be B1 proficiency, while certain countries want you to have like C levels and things like this. Some countries want a five-year stay; some countries want a 20-year stay. Some countries don't care how long you stay. You're born a citizen, right?

There's this recent case of Japan: an Indian couple—no, an Indian man married to a Japanese woman—who has a child, and they live in Tokyo, I think. They've been running a restaurant for, like, God knows how many years, and suddenly the father has been told, "You have to leave because the results are okay." So, yeah. There is a case that probably, in Japan only, I think, probably born and lived in there, like, parents are even born there, but if you were born there, your nationality is there, you get citizenship. So that probably would be born and lived in there.

Yeah, so, apart from—so, yeah, coming to procedures, these are not necessarily distinct things, which means it's not only being born, which is why I was a bit hesitant about saying it's a—yeah, no, I just couldn't hear properly. You don't have a computer? Yes.

So these are not necessarily distinct and individual, which means some countries will require you to be born and have lived there for a certain number of years. Some countries will want you to be of lineage, but there will be a specific registration process which grants you citizenship, grants you formal citizenship, right? In the US, for example, you don't have to do any of that. Just a birth certificate is good enough to give you a passport. There is no other requirement to recognize yours.

So don't think of these as only—this is the only way. It may be a combination of things, or it may be variations of something. One more difference that, I mean, as he asked, is that, I mean, land ownership and taxes, these are pretty specific, but then naturalization can have a specific leniency to it, no?

No, yes. So all of—okay, so this is, if you remember last time when we were talking about justice, I used two specific terms: a substantive idea and a procedural idea. A substantive idea is the larger idea; the procedural idea is the actual fixed way in which you do this, right?

So this also—so these are the substantive ideas. Being born is substantive; the procedural part of it, having a birth certificate and somebody on a birth certificate. Lineage is your parents; that's a substantive idea, but how do you prove your lineage?

So this is something that's going to be common across the board: we are going to distinguish between the larger normative ideas and the actual procedures, because the actual procedures suffer from the problems of history and politics and local context and things like this. So they can differ in certain ways.

Okay, so once we have this kind of thing, I just want to very quickly give it a certain definitional category. So this allows us to understand who the citizen—who can be a citizen, right? But what it does not allow us to do is it does not allow us to define what does it entail, what does it really mean to be a citizen.

So I'm going to start. I'm going to let you clear, and I'm not answering this question here. I'm merely trying to define what is the category of citizenship. So, very simply, something that's largely within the domain of politics and public administration and law that is recognized as a universal way of looking at it is membership of a political community. And, of course, here the political community for political scientists is—

Citizenship.

The state, yes. So having membership of that particular political entity is citizenship. It's like the simplest way we can understand it.

No? No, I'm sorry.

And here, so now to connect it back to what we did here is: how do you become a member? You become a member by being born, by having lineage, by going to national leadership and all that process. Does that make sense?

The second thing is citizens have a direct relation with the state. So, as a result of this membership, the relationship is, of course, another relationship of citizens with citizens, which are what we call civil relationships. But this political relationship between citizen and state is an important one. It's not merely an idea of membership, but it's an idea of a relation. And we will explore this idea of a relation in a little bit.

Third is citizens have entitlements. When I say entitlements, I don't necessarily mean benefits. I don't necessarily mean things the citizens have to do. It's a combination of everything: that this relationship between the citizen and the state has certain expectations. What form those expectations take, we'll come to that in a little bit. But it's not a simple... I mean, there are many ways of looking at it.

Just to give it a metaphorical comparison, if you have a best friend, you have a direct relationship with that best friend. So there is something that you consider you are entitled to as a result of that relationship, right? Like your best friend is somebody you can call up whenever you want. Your best friend is somebody you can give money to, and your best friend doesn't give back. So whatever they may be, if you and others have a different idea. But friends, any sort of relationship comes with some sort of entitlement. And that's why I'm not calling it a benefit or a duty or something like this. I'm merely calling it entitlement. It's not something that has one particular thing.

So these three are broadly classical definitions of citizenship. Until the 1990s, many people within political science, within law, etc., used this categorization to understand citizenship. However, a new way of thinking of citizenship came in after the 1990s, which came from political theory, which came from this normative idea, which said that citizenship has... Citizenship gives meaning. Citizenship gives respect. Citizenship gives recognition of who individuals are.

So unlike these three, which tend to be a bit more clinical, if you realize, that they are a bit more cut and dry, that citizenship means membership, citizenship means relationship, citizenship means entitlements. Here it is taking a bit of a normative view, meaning a principled view, to say that apart from rules and processes and relationship, etc., citizenship tends to give meaning to people's lives, tends to be important to people's lives, tends to give a sort of respect to people's lives, etc.

And to go back to this example of a friend, it was very clear that when she would talk, not having citizenship meant that you were constantly treated as a non-entity, that whether it is borders or whether it is policemen or whether it is authorities, you are constantly at the receiving end of multiple inequalities and things like this. And the fact that, very literally, this idea of what you call a home does not exist on paper. There is no single way for you to define what...

So even if you say that you were born and raised in India, it does not necessarily mean that you have the full benefits of anyone living in India does, because you are still not considered to be Indian. And so this is something that... This was Marshall, P. H. Marshall, political theorist. This is something that will... ...and a couple of others have argued.

So this idea of citizenship has come a lot to feminist discourses, multicultural discourses, to try to argue that yes, citizenship is formal, yes, citizenship is procedural, etc., etc. However, we need to understand that citizenship does provide significant meaning, provides contribution to a person becoming... Even if you look at the Hegelian idea of the state, to be a full member of society, to be a full member of the state, this gives substantial value to the individual to truly become that. And therefore, if you do not have citizenship, or if citizenship is removed from you, or your citizenship is threatened, then clearly all of these start failing because you are unable to enjoy the true benefits of citizenship.

And therefore, while citizenship has often been understood as something that is passive, which is, as I was saying, you're born into a place, you're not clearly recognized, you're not really claiming yourself as a citizen until probably you get the right to vote. Then when you go into vote, after that you're still a citizen, but nobody really is daily asking you for your membership card, nobody is really asking you to prove your relationship to the state.

However, at the same time, what this group of people are arguing, these theorists are arguing, is that citizenship does perform a role that is more than an entitlements and relationship role, and that is to give meaning, that is to give support, that is to give some sort of clarity to the...

...and to your position within society. Questions about this, yes?

But then how does this even make sense?

Because at the end of the day, every citizenship on Earth is not just free to sit. Nobody is saying that, come and become a citizen. So it's all a respect of contracts and a trade of benefits rather than meaning, respect, and recognition. So where did that idea come from?

The idea comes from the fact that what happens to people whose citizenship is in distress. So in countries which have gendered ways of accessing entitlements, women can't drive on the road, women can't go on properties, etc. The question of citizenship is directly—I mean, imagine a life where you are a member of a place, but your membership of a place does not allow you to reach that. It's complicated, no?

So the biometric wasn't working, so we just wrote all of our names. Is that being written by names? Yeah, on a different sheet of paper.

Yeah. Still answered this question somewhat abstract. I think Marshall described the citizen as an incomplete citizen. That's what we commonly call the second-class citizen. Essentially, maybe to a Swedish citizen. How? A citizen, maybe to a Swedish citizen, yeah, but constitutionally a citizen of a state, but even after, as he calls it, the social rights, the respect, the recognition, and the meaning in their life. So, say people who go across India right now, they're not full citizens in the complete sense. That's why they sometimes call themselves second-class citizens. That's what Marshall said.

Yeah, exactly. So whether it is being a full procedural citizen but not an actively enjoying—just one second—so being a procedural citizen but not actually being a citizen. You are a citizen, but you are not a citizen. I'm not able to grasp the—so what does citizenship offer? Let's just do this to the Tibetan woman's example so it gets easier.

So let's say the Tibetan didn't have citizenship. So again, she couldn't reap the benefits of, let's say, being born in the territory and staying there. And that's why it isn't recognized. So everything springs up from, like, a trade point of view, right? There's nothing—

No, Tibetan citizenship does not—I mean, I don't know. I don't know. I'm just like—

Yeah, basically China took over Tibet for a while. India recognized that this was an aggression against the state and therefore gave refugee status. People from Tibet escaped to different parts of the world, notably to India. And so most people, like her, for example, chose not to acquire Indian citizenship because acquiring Indian citizenship meant that you no longer have a claim on your place of birth. So there is no—it's a political—

That's also a trade-off, right? I mean, either accept that you're Indian and lose that, or keep that and lose this. So again, it's—

So ultimately, therefore, saying that having a recognizable membership usually—

I'm saying it's all a very procedural thing. I still don't see the, you know, zoom out to meaning, respect, and recognition.

So, going back to what Data is saying, what Marshall and many others argue is there are terms such as differentiated citizenship. So, in the example of Saudi Arabia that I was trying to give, there are ways that genders are treated differently. So if citizenship is supposed to grant you a certain number of entitlements, but it's granting entitlements only to some citizens and not other citizens, to those that those entitlements are not being granted, they do not have full enjoyable lives.

But that's not the issue of the citizenship, right? It goes beyond to the system of the state itself that's enforcing these things. Citizenship is recognizing what a citizen is entitled to and not entitled to.

So if I can suggest a thought experiment, think of it in this way. Think of not being able—have you ever lost a wallet?

Yeah. So when you lose—have you lost a wallet and a phone at the same time?

Okay. At that moment, can you go to any person? How do you go to any person and prove that you are indeed a person in distress? How do I know you are not a con artist? How do I know you are not a thief? How do I know you are not, etc.? At that moment, you are not able to enjoy what you otherwise enjoy. Suddenly, you are at a—

And that immediate half an hour after losing these things makes you completely destabilized. Which means at that point in time, even persuading an auto-rickshaw that takes me 5 kilometers away, and when I reach there, I will give you money, the auto-rickshaw is like, do I really trust this guy?

Which means the moment something is taken away from you is when you realize how important it is. Now this is precisely the substantive notion of citizenship. That's what I meant by it being so passive that we carry it around with us like a wallet.

What the feminist theorists and what the multicultural theorists are saying is, essentially, the minute you start taking away citizenship from people or you prohibit a specific class of citizens from accessing what citizenship is supposed to give them, there is a lack of meaning, there is a lack of respect, there is a lack of recognition, especially recognition.

But then that's just human society, right? There's always a lack of meaning, a lack of respect.

Yeah, but unless you recognize this, you do not know how to make it better. Essentially, and this is something which, in my experience with talking to not only computer scientists but generally engineering people who do not see the point of social science education, is they assume that social change comes out of technology. It doesn't. Social change comes out of ideas. The fact that in the Constituent Assembly, somebody somewhere was thinking, yeah, plain land, do it together, you know, do that person, do that person, do it or not, is a testimony to that fact, right?

So therefore, and this is what I'm saying, that in the 1990s, at this specific moment of time, people said, if you only look at this, then somebody will say, "Oh, but you have citizenship. What are you complaining about?" Which is the discourse happening in India right now. Don't go off to the state. Why are you complaining? It shouldn't, that shouldn't be the case. The point is, how do you make it fully valuable for people who do not have it, who are unable to fully enjoy its benefits, who are unable to fully enjoy its purpose, who are unable to fully recognize its entitlements, et cetera?

I mean, this goes, I think, in some ways to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It's, do we, when we do say, "Okay, you know, we want to recognize these people," are we really willing to grant them the same entitlements? Probably not, right? Which is historically, this is what colonization has done. Colonization said all of these are the Commonwealth nations, but, and all members of the Commonwealth are my members, but did everybody get the same entitlements? No, they didn't.

So the distinction that we are trying to make is to recognize that you may have procedural, all the things in place, all of this may be fine, but is that individual truly able to fully enjoy the scope of the citizenship by law, by promise, by government, et cetera, et cetera? That's an important question.

And this therefore got, and we'll probably read an essay about how the feminist discourse about citizenship is really amazing, that most of these, right, this idea of lineage, the idea of property, these are all very masculine determinations, that ownership of property is historically a masculine domain. Lineage is something that historically would come from a very patriarchal point of view, et cetera, et cetera. And their argument is that the entire notion of who can be a member and who cannot be a member has historically been defined by men based upon certain procedural and categories that they think is very, very important.

So where did these ideas come from? And therefore what they are saying is citizenship should—so now the most recent thing I've heard is citizenship should be about caring for members, that it's not about, that entitlement meaning everybody should be taken care of. Now this is a vocabulary that was not there before the 1990s. So it's a newish idea, it's being expanded upon, there are countries which have adopted it, there are smaller units that have adopted it as well. But yeah, I hope this in some way addresses that. I don't know, I'm just like...

Yeah, basically China took over Tibet for a long time. India recognized that this was an aggression against the state and therefore gave refugee status. People from Tibet escaped to different parts of the world, notably to India. And so most people, like her, for example, chose not to acquire Indian citizenship because acquiring Indian citizenship meant that you no longer have a claim on your place of birth. So there is no...

... recognizing the issues.

Oh yeah, specifically in the North Sentinel Island case, I feel like I disagree with the fact that we're not doing the other half of citizenship too and just doing the procedural part. Because I feel like the act of allowing those people to continue to live their lives the way they desire instead of forcing them to acclimatize to our world is itself an act of respect. It is actually an act of respect in and of itself, an act of recognition.

So, yeah, sure, I agree with that. But are you willing to? Are you therefore saying that India as a country should therefore allow communities to have their own practices and beliefs and the country will not interfere with that at all?

Contextually, sure. Like, it really depends, like, contextually. There should not be a uniform civil code. Not, like, again, for this, again, it just very depends contextually. Like, here... Again, the contextualization was the last question.

The minute you introduce context, you are saying all the systems are not for women because men are a different country. That is the problem with this. So, sure, fundamentally, in principle, I agree with you that indigenous persons should have certain rights and entitlements, but I'm not sure whether this is a large principle that can be adopted by the state. But we'll come to that when we come to this.

Okay, two-minute break, and then I'll start again. Yes. I will pick them up, but there is Susan O'Keefe, there is Anupama Roy. Actually, I'm going to give a couple of readings to Anupama Roy. Then there is Carol Fagan, but I will give you the five readings for this. Wait a minute, Carol Fagan.

Just to remind you, and I have to come to the end of your thesis this year, that apart from the books and general reading, typically for a lot of political ideas, the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy is very good. It's not Wikipedia, but it's a good long way of reading, storing, getting into a theme, finding examples, finding additional readings, etc. So, for instance, I think the citizenship page certainly has many references on indigenous peoples and individuals.

Then you should also look for these things called handbooks. So there's the Oxford Handbook. Let's say there's the Oxford Handbook of Political Theory. Handbooks are good because they give you very thematic chapters on very specific things. And the third is short introductions. So Oxford has a series called Oxford Short Introduction, and then there are Short Short Introductions, which are only like 20 pages and 20 pages, some of which are available within a line.

Are you sure? Just get the full set. Do you know who had? They don't have? Okay, we should certainly get—last time you gave them a book, it took them six months to get it on the shelves.

Sorry? Last time you gave them a book, it took them six months to get it on the shelves.

Okay, yeah, sure. You gave them last week? No, really? Okay, I am sorry. Actually, they will not give me reimbursement for that book also. I purchased it six months ago and gave it. That's okay. I will also—the Andrew Heywood book I gave them is brand new, but it's more practical.

What brand new?

The Andrew Heywood book. I gave it to them, mostly about practical politics and not political theory. There's another Andrew Heywood book. It's called Political Theory, that has a bunch of concepts that they gave us. So I put political concepts.

You put Andrew Heywood Politics?

I put Andrew Heywood Politics, yeah, which has a lot of the things that we are doing, both conceptual as well as empirical. Not a lot of it, I think. The other one, the Andrew Heywood Political Theory one, has a lot.

So citizenship is not a problem. Yeah, in the qualitative book it will be there, but it won't be a chapter in itself. In the Key Concepts in Politics book—the Family Key Concepts in Politics. Palgrave has a really short essay on citizenship. It's like barely 10 minutes.

Okay, so it's a bit odd that some of these really established texts do not have a section on citizenship. And that has to do also because citizenship otherwise is between political science, public policy, and law. And there's a lot of writing in law. So Anupama Roy is very interesting because she does both. She does political science, and she does law, and she does a bit of anthropology.

Yeah, so I was looking at the editor of the course on citizenship, which was excellent, a great concept on citizenship. Okay, so I will...

Okay, so the second question that we are asking is: What does citizenship entail? And this is where what you were referring to is going to somehow help us. So let me ask very broadly: When we say that citizenship has entitlements, what are those entitlements? What do you... If you think that being... Okay, so let me ask you a question. Does citizenship have a purpose in your mind?

Okay, so the British state has purpose; it has meaning.

No, no, but again, the purpose means suppose I, let's say, renounce my citizenship. Am I losing meaning? I don't think... It's again a trade-off in my view.

Are you thinking of meaning as dictionary meaning?

Yeah, same.

Actually, we are the same thing.

But, okay, so you renounce it publicly.

I am obligated to inform somebody that I haven't. It can't just be...

Yeah, so you have to inform the consulate of the country wherever you are.

Yeah.

But you renounce as a person, as a country citizen.

Again, it's a trade-off, right?

I mean, it's going to be very difficult to live your life if you don't have citizenship. Because you discover this wonderful thing that destroys your life and occupies a big part of your time and money, and you worry about it a lot. It's called taxes. It's going to destroy your life. Okay, we'll come to that also. But somebody had a hand to introduce something. Okay, what does it entail? Like fundamental rights.

If you have fundamental rights in your constitution, you should have them as a citizen. Think of a problem, because fundamental rights include the right to life. The right to life is generalized for non-citizens also. But if you are a citizen, you definitely have them. You may not have them.

Even if you are not a citizen, you have fundamental rights? Okay, so maybe there were citizen-specific rights that you get as a citizen. I mean, that is what I am asking. You lose political rights, so the right to vote, the right to... Okay, so that's a specific form of rights. So, Davis is talking about political rights. And what are those political rights, Davis? Say, the right to vote, the right to vote in a PAN card, I guess.

PAN card? PAN card, driving license.

It's not a right. I can't... What do you mean?

Right to be in a party, right to stand for elections, stuff like that. Maybe even because of sovereignty, the right to campaign, like even if, like, to encourage someone to vote for a particular party requires...

Okay, let's normalize. Now, I am going to think, okay, quality doesn't necessarily mean politics, doesn't mean voting, leadership, political party. There are many other things. So, for instance, the right to publish an opinion article in a newspaper is a fundamental right of speech and expression, but it is a political right. The power of free speech and the power of expression is a political right because it allows you to put your political views forward. So, there is a variety of things.

Right to work in a public institution, maybe?

Yeah, that's an economic right, but it's definitely a kind of right.

Sorry? Do you have political rights?

I wouldn't characterize it as a problem.

What do you mean by embassy protection? If you are not a citizen of the country, can you be in the country? You can't? Too much. I mean, you can, but yeah, sure, I mean, the embassy recognizes you as a citizen and gives you support and power and privileges and all of that, but I wouldn't put it under these. Embassy is like an analytic, but sorry?

Voter campaign, election, expression.

What about protection in general? Like the purpose of the army, let's say?

Protection of what?

This is a life question.

Yeah, that's fine. I mean, I don't have a problem with you saying fundamental rights, but protection is good, but it may be liberty, it may be life, it may be whatever it is, but essentially we are talking about protection of liberty, right?

Sorry?

Not necessary. You can in other countries, but depending from country to country, there is a lot of...

What is the rule in India?

In India, you can't. If you are a private individual, you can't, but a company can. But even as a resident citizen, you can't purchase land in some parts of India. So if you, for example, not in Maharashtra, in Himachal, you cannot purchase land in Himachal, say with Goa as well, you can't directly purchase land unless you have been a resident there for some particular period of time, or something.

Sorry?

Kashmir before 370.

Kashmir before 370 was another one as well. So that changes from case to case.

The head of state vouches for you when you travel. Do you have the passport?

The head of state vouches for you when you travel, yeah. The passport, by the way, has a—I don't know if you have seen the first page—it is by the president saying that this is my citizen, please take care of him. So it goes out of the same protection of rights.

So, you don't need embassy protection as long as you have a valid passport and as long as you have a valid visa and you have done nothing wrong. Then the state is supposed to treat you with respect and dignity and all of that. But in case it doesn't, you have the embassy protection.

The right to pay income taxes.

The right to pay?

The entitlement to have to pay specific taxes.

Sorry, tax is a word for it, and I'm surprised you're not saying it. The inquisition, the obligation. Beauty.

So, very broadly speaking, there are three categorizations of citizenship. What does citizenship entail? There are three broad views. Again, these are not only this versus only this versus only this, but we will realize that each country reflects one model more than the other.

So the first is what would be considered as the liberal view of citizenship. And this is the liberal view of citizenship: that you have a legal membership to the state, and this legal membership affords you the protection of your liberties. The state's responsibility is to protect you at all costs.

Who does this sound like? It's been barely three days. The question is, who does this sound like? This idea of citizenship.

Locke, Locke.

Yeah, it's a liberal idea. It's a very, very modern idea that the state is responsible for protecting you at all costs and protecting your rights at all costs.

So the state should protect your property. The state should have an army to protect your property. The state should have the police to make sure nobody's harming each other. The state should have a judiciary, whatever happens to the judiciary. Protect your liberties at the end of the day, right? So the fundamental idea of citizenship is this membership of the state, apart from the state taking care of you and protecting you at all costs. And this can be interpreted differently.

So, for example, if you are a welfare state, the welfare state will say, not only will I protect liberties, but I will also provide you, which is a protection of liberty, right? So it may interpret liberties in many other ways, but it's a very liberal idea that protection of freedoms, protection of rights is what is important for the state. And this is what the purpose of the state is.

The second thing is what is called the republican view of citizenship, which does not take this sort of minimalist idea, but it suggests that at the end of the day, the state is a political agency, that individuals create the state, individuals contribute to the state, individuals pay taxes to the state, and that individuals have political desires, have political wills, have elected representatives, so on and so forth. And therefore, this view of the state considers that the relationship between the citizen and the state is always one of participation.

So this is the key feature: that the citizen is allowed to participate in choosing your leaders, the citizen is allowed to tell the leaders what they want, the citizen is allowed to protest to the government when they want, the citizens are allowed to make their general will known to the public, etc. It's not passive citizenship like here, but the citizen is actively involved in speaking to the state, in creating the state, in breaking down the state, in remodeling the state, etc.

Who does this sound like? Rousseau.

It's a very Rousseauian idea of the state. Yeah, and this is essentially that as political animals, humans should not merely be receivers of the state's protection, but the citizens should actively participate in determining the shape of the state and what nature it is. And the citizens should be involved in telling the state when it is wrong and things like this.

The third idea of the state is the communitarian view of the state. So first, let's understand what that means.

So as the name suggests, it is about being members of a community. That we have already established. But what the community needs to say is, so you use the specific word duty, you want to give an explanation of what community animals are being? Kind of a specific duty between the state and the citizens, state's duty or the duty of the citizens?

Yeah, so that this relationship, so here it's a fairly equitable relationship without any obligations except the risk of predation. Here it is more bottom up, that citizens constantly keep a watch on the state and citizens are constantly defining the role of the state. Here it's a bit bottom up, top down, which seems to suggest that all of us are members of the state and all of us enjoy the protection of the state, and therefore all of us have an obligation to the state. All of us have certain duties that we need to perform to the state.

This takes the view not only from this notion of duty for the sake of duty, but what it is trying to suggest is being members of the state means recognizing that you are a member of a community that has contributed to your growth and well-being. And if the state has contributed to your growth and well-being, then you should give back to the state. You should perform tasks to the state.

And this therefore also is referred to as a moral view of citizenship because it is placing a certain expectation on how the citizen should behave. What is this duty you are supposed to fall into, right?

So in India's Constitution, where are our duties laid out? Students who have read the Constituent Assembly debates, who have read so much about the Indian Constitution, where are the duties laid out?

Section 5.

Sorry, what section 5?

The Directive Principles.

And the Directive Principles of State Policy. Because it is an expectation that the duty of the state is to follow. It is constant, but it is also an understanding that citizens have to perform these duties as well. Which is, I mean, the state should perform. That is the point of dedication. The expectation is you are members of the state.

So this moral idea can be about performing specific duties, such as citizens should vote or citizens have to pay taxes when they are given, etc. However, the big problem with the communitarian view is what most people have recognized: communitarian notions of citizenship tend to replace group behaviors.

Which is, it should be what the larger community wants that everybody else must follow through with. So, to give an example, the larger community does not want you to eat a particular kind of meat, and therefore everybody has the duty not to eat the meat. So it can end up imposing the view of the larger community within the citizenry. Or it can introduce certain moral ideas that become dominant moral ideas, which may be antithetical to the morals of the individuals.

You guys did value education last year? And did you guys do this thing of individual values versus group values?

There wasn't that kind of value education.

Okay, we will have a longer—this year is the first time I am teaching value education. I think we will have it next semester. We will have value education again next semester.

Yeah, I know we do. But I will not be teaching it.

Because that fundamentally should not be one of the educational institutions. You could take our class and then always mark all of us present, and then we just don't come. And you can exercise your right to protest. I don't think there is any value in that.

But the communitarian view tends to give value to group identities, tends to give value to group morality, and the expectation that everybody who is not a member of that group also follows through with it. And therefore, this has been seen quite critically because it is fairly antithetical to minority rights, such as the people in that particular rights. It is different for women, it is difficult for linguistic groups, etc.

So, to give an example, there is this—I was just reading yesterday—in Mumbai, in Maharashtra, they passed a law that rickshaw drivers and taxi drivers have to learn Marathi, and it has been implemented. And there is a deadline on this one that if you do not learn to speak Marathi, then you cannot drive an auto rickshaw in the Bombay city limits; you cannot drive a taxi.

Now, this is an example of a group imposing its moral idea. It's saying that speaking Marathi is a duty for every person, especially those performing these taxi jobs, and therefore you have to impose this, that idea.

Similarly, in Canada, the region of Quebec is where a large number of French-speaking people settle, and over a period of time, the Quebec region has adopted laws that say that if you want to settle down in Quebec, you have to learn French.

Now, this is an instance where a minority ended up imposing the group rights for the entire community, and now the Quebec region has multiple ways that you can go and become a resident of Canada, but you cannot go and become a resident of Quebec unless you meet the individual character regulations.

So both of these are instances to show why the communitarian view of the state can be problematic, because it is a problem specifically for minority groups, specifically for linguistic minorities, oppressed genders. It also seems to give a strong gate to cultural rights and cultural relationships. So Marathi, French, practices of food, these get more privacy than political or economic arrangements. And this, as you can see, can be a problem as well.

And finally, this idea of beauty and obligation—that it has this moral position that you have to do this, otherwise you are not a good enough citizen, and that can come with punishments. A way of understanding this is something like compulsory military conscription, where the state makes it mandatory that all citizens of a certain age have to enroll in the military, and you are obligated to do so. And if you do not do so, then you are treated as a criminal because you are not fulfilling what is required.

Yeah, so the three broad—these three views of citizenship are how it is perceived differently in different countries. In the typical fundamental American constitution way, it's clearly the liberal idea of citizenship. The Swiss idea of citizenship is very republican in nature. It encourages participation quite substantially. While the communitarian idea is something that is not easily found uniquely anywhere in the world, which means by itself, but certain countries place a premium on having communitarian things as a part of its citizenship requirements.

Now, if you look at India, India is a great example of a mixed—it has a very mixed model. What Anupama Roy and many others argue:

Fundamentally, the constitution believes in the liberal conception, but the constitution also encourages all of this, right? Because you have a set of rights that are aimed at making sure anyone can participate in the political process. It does not need to be restricted to voting in elections, but it includes things like making public speeches, assuming public leadership, having public assembly, etc.

But recently, there has been a slow shift toward pushing a communitarian idea in India, where this notion of duty or this notion of obligation to the republic is something that has slowly taken more and more precedence.

And therefore, it's a balancing act because India needs to support all three, but not all three conceptions of citizenship are very, very compatible.

Specifically, there are these interesting things. I don't know if you know of them, so in the UK, for example, under Commonwealth laws, an Indian citizen living in the UK has the political right to vote in the UK. Did you know this? You have the right to stand for public office, even if you are not a citizen of England, and even if you are a citizen of India, but you have lived in the UK for a particular period of time, you still enjoy certain non-citizens. You can stand for elections, you can vote in certain elections. I mean, it's not like you can vote in two districts and vote; you need to go on a residential leave, or you need to stay for six months or something like this, but you are eligible to vote.

So the way that rights are interpreted in different contexts is different, but it's certainly, yeah, it's not a cut-and-dry thing.

What I want you to do, because we are running a bit short on class, is—it's okay, I'm going to send a reading for you guys—but any quick questions or clarifications that you have about what we have done and about these kinds of things?

Good. So in the next class, the first 10 minutes I'm going to give you—our next class is specifically in the post-2000s context, and we look at the Citizenship Amendment Act as a specific case study to understand what was the big problem with it and why there is a big opposition to it, and we will be doing a citizenship test in class.

I feel preferred, maybe just like, I think, because we have less class, we could come earlier. I don't know if everyone is fine with that. On the days we have tests, we can just come like 15 minutes earlier, because you have to figure out the room, because maybe someone else has the room before.

You get the full timetable.

Of every class?

Yeah, so can you just take a look at the slot on Tuesdays before this one, so the 10:45 slot, and see which classrooms are empty, because you can see which classrooms are occupied in there.

Okay, and then...

All right, sorry, I was just getting caught up, so we will do a non-identify, good. Can you do it on the internet? Good.
