The study of Indian politics can be read to most of these concepts. There are certain processes which we have not thought of. One example is the communications.

Because I could tell you that there are five types of elections. There's a first part of the whole system, there's a simple monarchy, there's etc., etc. There's a simple transfer of the whole system. Australia has this, the UK has this, India has this, and so on and so forth. But I don't want that because generally you can press up on that through other games also.

But at the same time, I remember, I think it was in the first or second class, that we just one and ask, how do we translate a discipline into a quantitative study, or how do we translate this into something that we can kind of really engage with and try to understand in a specific manner?

So to do that, we are going to study what we call public policies, and we are going to do a crash course, dash course. And then you do a public question and answer.

But before that, have you seen the syllabus document on Unu? Okay. I changed it this morning to give you two out of three options. So yesterday, don't bother opening any instability. I can tell you what the change is.

Yesterday, it was only one ideology and relationship between steps a little bit. The third option is you can do an evaluation of one particular comic course. So these are the three options. Choose any two, and we have legal questions for all three, like targeted questions for all three, and give you the option of writing any two. So it's completely switching things you'll be prepared for.

And which is also like the state citizenship question. It's a relationship question and it's not a defining question. There are the definitions and things like this you have done. So we can move on to a bit more of an analogy to look at.

Okay, and one more thing was that I am reverting to, I am going back to that originally declared plan, that out of five assessments, all five assessments will be five, right? It will be assessed according to the original data, which is no, four out of five. Sorry, four out of four best out of five will be updated as your this thing. So by improve four is 20, and then we'll still have 30 for the next semester.

Yes. I have a this is one to put questions. So what are the things that are—was that like one of the Marxist critiques of our neighborhoods? The critique was that we have organized free-speech democracies, but they view that as itself being oppressive. It's deceptively open and free. So what do they propose exactly? What do Marxists propose?

Because I personally feel like, you know, to a certain extent, I have free speech, I have openness. I think they repeated think quite all that stuff like that. But they are viewing that itself as being deceptive. So did you feel that exactly how it's deceptive, or just what did they offer specifically?

I mean, okay. Just knowing what it's not, the trust not only the e-boxes but the critical thinkers who made this suggestion. Generally, the argument is that free speech—remember the ladder of perception, so simple, such ladder of citizenship—there is a certain way in which you are given the option of free speech, which means you are full, you can say what you want, etc., etc. But how much of that is actually translated into a change in governance, or a change in policy, or a change in decision-making?

So this is what Samantha told me earlier in the semester: the university asks the student parliament what are his views on this, and the student parliament talks to the students, and the student talks about the students. The argument says this is what the student's view is, and the extra view does what it wants to do anyway.

So that's the explanation of the Marxist critique: students really, look, they are given free speech, but this does not really mean much because it is nowhere translated into actual decision.

The Marxist alternative is you do not—it's not that they are against free speech, but they're suggesting that the way in which free speech is operationalized should be different.

An example of this is what we have discussed as the Swiss canton example: cantons in Switzerland make certain decisions which are binding upon higher. And so this is one way of enforcing it.

The other way of enforcing it is everything requires a majority, majority. So this is something that in India, when it came after 1992 with the implementation of the 73rd Amendment Act, things that directly affect a village have to take the permission of the villagers. So you cannot simply build a road through a village. You even have a—and 75% of the answer needs to decide. They need to vote and decide whether they want to be stored or not.

So the only Marxist thing would be that they're not going to be able to do that of the lowest rank of workers and let these guys make the decisions instead of it being topped up. And as you can see correctly, it directly connects to the Marxist idea itself that any usual decision-making will never be for the control of the class.

So, for the ideology section, I don't know how many of you read the chapter on ideology. But again, do not to make your ideal band look on your face and do that. Oh, I can't one chapter. If you have an acceptor, then I can prepare for the mid-semester, then you don't need to work on it, or that's why you need to prepare for the end. Then, yeah, yeah, but that was just meeting my thinking.

So yes, if somebody also asked, why do we read handbook so much? I mean, I read handbook because he put is a basic. It is anyone, it's a nice, easy language without complication. Even if you read the National Political Ideology for a dayboard and then read the Stanford network, this thing, you will see that there is a distinction between the pedagogical and the kind of examples that are used.

I've also uploaded the link of this link called OpenStacks, which is an open-source text focuser, so that also has fairly simple language, but nothing prevents you from going beyond these texts. So yes, writer, you may have read one chapter of for one specific idea on paper, but that equals 50% of your credit. Now it is your unique tool, e.g. So I give examples, look for other articles or written about the ideology, look for a diversity of sources, that will automatically improve your analysis.

Okay. Are we there with ideologies and grades and marketing? Cool.

Okay. Yes, status. Public policy, like how, what is that time? What's the time that public policy? What's the what one person is creating a public policy? How is I expect that I expect talking about it? So maybe we'll get to the end of the class for that question.

So remember, in the inverse class, I said that it's a bit, but that it's like we don't every day see a government official around us. But we do see that the city is built in a service way, that services are given in a certain way, that some official somewhere is approving your applications for passport or driver license and things like this.

And the point that I was trying to make back then, 15 lectures ago, was that the government is omnipresent. The government is what shapes the world around us. Wherever we live, whatever the conditions of our social, economic, political lives are, these are quite regularly defined by what we broadly refer to as the government.

And then I don't understand how the government actually works and what the government actually imagines, what the government actually implements. The best way to do this is through what we call public policy.

So, public policy is identified in various ways. It can be seen as an action plan that the government has to do something, like the government has a specific delivery, and so public policy can be seen as this is how you are going to do it.

Public policy can be seen as actual delivery of governments, that yes, there is something called as the government, but for you to access the government, it has to do a certain number of things. Therefore, we use the term delivery.

And public policies are also ways to understand the object is the goal, like what government really wants to do, what it sets out to do, and it can also be understood as decisions that the government makes about that particular point.

So, right now, I'm just putting this as a broad-based view. I will categorize this as we go along. But generally, we are suggesting that when we look at the world around us, everything is shaped by public policy.

The fact that somebody decided how to remove jewelry building in Hyderabad is a result of public policy. The fact that Chandra Bhagavan II decided that there will be something called as a high-tech city, there will be something but a financial aspect, is an outcome of public policy.

The fact that we do have something called as the IITs, which are meant to encourage knowledge in technology, in engineering, is a better public policy. That someone somewhere decided that the government believes that people should have an employment, and therefore we had MG Radi Law or BBG Lumgi as public policy. These are all outcomes of public policy.

At some point of time in the cities of Mumbai and Delhi, it was decided that pollution is too high, and therefore taxis and rickshaws needed to ECNG should not be petrolled or tasked with. That's a result of public policy.

In Delhi, in case you are trying to say that license plates with even numbers won these days and license plates with odd numbers won these days, that's also something policy decision.

Whether we should have government universities only, whether we have private universities also, that is a public policy decision as well.

And so, generally, you look around you: the fact that we use a certain language to communicate with each other, the fact that certain kinds of jobs are available in the country, the fact that certain cities and towns have grown in certain ways in law, history, as well as my history—these are all examples of real implementation of public policy.

So, in all these laws and definitions, what we see is, it seems to imply that the government seems to have some sort of a vision of the future, some sort of a goal of the future, some kind of end that it wants to reach, a goal that it wants to achieve. And therefore, anything that it does to formulate these goals and reach these goals becomes what we call as a—

Remember that even today, 70 years after, we still have—which is a public policy aimed at improving gender access to education. Why? Because right since independence and even before that, we have consistently held that equal education for all should be a goal of the government. And then, whether you see the BJP, whether it is the Congress, whether it is the ADA, whether it is the EPA, whether it is the corporations, whether it is the central issue, whatever you want to identify, all of them have, along the way, somewhere emphasized that, yes, education for all is definitely a public policy objective that we are setting for ourselves.

So I'm going to erase this now because we'll replace it with a bit more formal way of understanding it. So there are—okay, so before we do that, what we have—why do we call it public policy? And I will interrupt to ask you a question. What is it? Why can't it simply be policy? What is the nature of public for it?

So what? The government asks for the execution of this specific argument.

Okay, so one argument is the government is a public institution, and therefore the decisions it makes are public.

Okay, what else?

The policy directly affects the public, so benefit the public policy. The policy, the goal of the policy, the target of the policy is the public, and therefore it's an open policy.

Okay. Why is public in the sense that it is open to a certain extent? That means the policies must be closed.

Yeah, to some extent, that there's not a substantive enough reason for it to be published.

Sure, there are ways to do this. There certainly is the fact that because it is aimed at people, it should have a public approvement plan on this. But if you should try and see whether the contract details for the village outside are available in public or not, you'll find they are not available.

But there's one specific SR. It's from your SR. Everything is tax money. It's not money from somebody else. There are some policies that get money from external aid agencies and things like this, but the money by nature comes from the public and is integrated for the public.

This is by far one of the leading definitional distinctions of public policy. And expenditure is aimed for coming to the market and goes to the market, which is also why we tend to get this stuff about infiltrators coming and stealing our food, because we immediately see another passage: why should it be given to somebody else?

And so, yeah, this is one of the determinants. So public money, public benefits, and the public nature of government are what are important to remember when you learn the public money.

So I'm going to give you three stages which are good for this economic policy. And I will also use these three stages to explain how we can study this from a sometimes computational, sometimes non-computational line: what are the ways in which these stages, or what do these ways of looking at public policy, have for us as students of the human sciences?

So generally, these three stages are globally eccentric. Policies are often studied between studies of government, but also studies of business, because businesses also have their own policies. So there is— which is why there is easy compartmentalization in the larger social sciences, that there is some sense of structure to it.

So the first is what we call policy formulation. The second is what we call policy implementation, and the third is what we call policy outcomes.

So the state of coordination asks very specific questions. So the first is: who creates policy? How far agenda is that? Or how are the goals determined?

So who creates policies, and who is it in for, for and export? There are a few reasons.

So, I'm glad you asked that question of who determines public policy. So one would like to assume that someone somewhere stands there and says, in the government, there should be—there have been children. You don't want poverty in this country. Now, where does a statement like this come from? Sorry?

The government's ideology at the moment: somebody within that government belongs to a political party, and that person, that minister, member of parliament, or rural maybe, has a certain political ideal.

So remember, for example, which political ideology would suggest that there should be no poverty? Socialism? Yes, socialism, social welfare.

As a country, India historically, across political parties, public welfare has been fairly high on all political parties' agendas, right? So one would identify that one of the sources of public policy is ideology.

Let me explain. Let me use another example. In the last three or four years, there have been a number of off-catalyses that have come up in India. So, like, there is New York University in New York, then there was New York University in Abu Dhabi, and now there is going to be New York University in India, in Delhi or very well.

Similarly, there was University of Sheffield. University of Sheffield started on Malaysia campus; now it is starting an India campus. Now, why did this happen only in the last four years and not before that? Because before this, we had laws that said that foreign investment cannot be made in the field of education. Education has to be domestic because we do not want external ideas and ideological influences.

Constitutionally, the state is responsible for education and for welfare. We have the right to education and other provisions, which always emphasize and maintain that the government is responsible for education. But we have always focused this on primary education and secondary education.

Now, before this, around ten years ago, a certain number of universities started introducing private programs, private universities such as Ashoka, Shirnadar, Obi Jenka, Nisimbasis, et cetera, right? So these were considered as private for-profit universities. Before this, universities could not, by definition, be for profit.

So there were certain changes in laws which said, “We no longer need to constrain what—sorry—we no longer need to spend money on education. Instead, the private market will provide educational opportunities for students.”

What is that representative of—an ideology? Sorry. No? Yeah. Capitalism, neoliberalism, et cetera, right? Which would argue that free markets determine educational thinking.

So when we say, where does public policy come from, policy can have ideological roots. Policy can have political party roots. There are certain political parties that have specific ideologies and want to promote that ideology. Therefore, there will be political parties and political authorities that will suggest that this is what the policy would be.

So it is often said that Menu, as a political authority, did have a certain affinity for science and technology, believing that science and technology are essential things for the benefit of the country. And therefore, you see that a lot of public expenditure within the European period is clearly aimed at developing science and technology archives and infrastructures as well.

Similarly, the BJP has been seen as a nationalist party, and one central tenet of nationalism is that of securitization, protection. Therefore, we see that India under the NDA in the last decade has increased its expenditure on defense and military establishments more than ever before. And this clearly indicates that political ideologies and political figures have determined certain objectives for the government itself.

While this is the simpler idea, policy is also created by specialists. So we have something called the EPI DO, before which there was a planning commission. Every state also has its own planning commission, has a planning board. You have multidisciplinary experts, economists, sociologists, and scientists as a part of planning authorities who are aware of what is happening in that region or in that country.

Quite often, these communities also create. So we have committees for the promotion of sport because someone suddenly realized that sports is one good way of encouraging physical activity, encouraging health, but also a way of acquiring employment into the future.

So at some point in time, we realized, okay, we need to spend certain money on sports. If I were to ask you who are the famous female athletes of India, who would you answer? Sorry? He is a guru.

So, as per athletics, as per athletics, so P. T. Usha, okay. Dooty Chand. Dooty Chand? Okay. But do you think we also missed—no, she is track and field too.

Track and field, central area. Very common. Boxing, not as simple as that.

What do you mean by athletics? Athletics is track, field, and things like pole vault, jumping, et cetera. Specific category of sports.

Lumber, archery. Archery. Okay, you see a lot of sportspeople, yeah.

What do you if you look at the 1980s and the 1990s, you can identify that Indian sportswomen in international competitions tended to be either from Kerala or from Haryana. And this clearly meant that something somewhere was happening in Haryana and Kerala, which to these women becoming successful, why were they not successful in other states?

So then a review tells us that through the 1970s, the government in these two states actively spent money on sports as a way of encouraging gender equality, not of doing sports. That is a way of encouraging public presence of women, as a way of encouraging participation in public spaces, etc.

And therefore, we can clearly see that public, and that is something that comes from specialists who say that, look, we don't need to consider employment. It only as academic work, we also can look at sports as well. It requires a group of specialists because, let's face it, and this is not a sarcastic commitment, where political leaders do not have the same specializations that academic or scientists tend to have.

So there is a reason why India invested in a space program at a certain point of time. There is a reason why the US invested in a space program at a point of time because there were specialists who were recommending that this has implications for, certainly, for defense, but it's also a very important thing. This also has implications for communication technologies, this also has implications for internet infrastructures, this has implications for weather planning inventors.

Now, this is not something that would come from ideologists. It is not something that would come from political parties, if necessary, but would largely come from specialists in certain domains.

You also public policy comes from the bureaucracy in India under Indian Administrative Service. Are trained quite widely. They are trained in a variety of disciplines, they are trained in a variety of decision-making. Very simply, that they are turned into some sort of specialists within the government.

And therefore, you would note that there are certain civil servants who become known for their contribution to a specific sector. So in the 1980s and 1990s, there were certain bureaucrats like Shagiri and Akhab and others who contributed specifically to India's IT policy. They created a lot of infrastructure, encouraged the government to spend money on buying an ID equipment, to open up the markets to divide ID equipment and things like this.

So again, this is not something that necessarily comes from politics but is something that comes from bureaucratic training, bureaucratic procedures, etcetera.

And even if an idea comes from the ideology or the idea comes from a political party or a political authority, the bureaucracy often has to create the necessary details of what it considers, how it imagines this policy can be implemented.

So, e.g., the political leader may say, "I don't want poverty in this country." The bureaucrat will say, "Okay, I will do this."

A. One bureaucrat will say, "I will do this by distributing money."

B. Another bureaucrat may say, "I will do this by distributing food."

Thirdly, another bureaucrat might say, "I will do this by providing jobs to everyone."

So, bureaucracies and specialists will have different interpretations of what public policy, of what political ideas of public policy, are.

So when we use the phrase pollination, then essentially it's not about, "Oh, there should be no poverty," but in order to reach a specific goal or a specific objective of government, how do we really create a set of rules, a set of processes, decide that, yes, a certain amount of money should be spent on this or a certain amount of money should be spent on that? This is all the domain of policy formulation.

And right now this is only the who question. And this is—I most of my research revolves in public policy or digitalization—and the who question has really changed in India.

For the longest time, in the first three decades, the determinants of public policy around technology in India was political leadership until the 1970s or so. After the 1970s, the bureaucracy starts making more and more interesting.

In the 80s and 90s, you have a bunch of specialists who are also political leaders. So Jairam Ramesh—and what's the guy's name? We'll come to you, give a reference to the, as the computer voice—they kept on recommending to Ajitani that, yes, we really need to have computerization, etc., etc.

And so there were a certain number of specialists that they wrote 1950s and 1990s, even people like Nanda Chakal and that other Indian who wants people to work seven days on leave.

Now I am going to these people for all their faults were responsible for persuading the government that India needs to have an IT policy.

Before the 1980s, we don't have an IT policy. We had technology policies, we had science policies, we had communication policies, but IT was not really identified.

But until the 2000s, a lot of this policy was formulated by bureaucracy and political leadership. After the 2000s, we start seeing that the private sector, and in particular consultants in the form of PWC, KPMC, Munster Young, started creating ID policies, McKinsey for India. Not only for India but regionally as well.

So if you read the history of Shin Ramonai Group and Helen, the IP expansion, you will see that China Mahmindu was deeply influenced by the PC consultants telling him that there should be a Vision 2020, this should be your goal, you have to create a world classity, you have to create a future city, etc.

So, this is just to say that the people who are going to be able to do it, who formulate policy, have changed over a period of time. There are also international organizations, so the Food and Agricultural Organization, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization have been instrumental in shaping policy within countries as well.

Polio eradication was clearly a policy goal for many countries. China managers, again, was a prevalent problem across the world under the European Union. And the UN Fund for Population helped countries create policies to improve the numbers of malaria, improve the numbers of, as in, address the number of malaria, address the number of malaria.

But this helps us understand that if we were to explore where public policies come from, this is a good domain of explanation that this particular policy is shaped by this group of actions. And this is also what helps us critically analyze whether this policy is really for public benefit or does it benefit somebody else.

So, for instance, I constantly argue in my work that India's digital policy, well, of course, it was at growth of regional states, and of course it was aimed at economic growth in the national government, that public policies of digitalization actually benefit only a very small number of companies and not the larger populations. The financial benefits are obtained by certain companies and not the general population.

And so this is something that when you start asking the question of who created the policy, it opens up a variety of data sets and a variety of technologies.

Formulation also is important because it helps determine the goals, that this is what my policy is for. So again, Chandra Bhagavanu's policy was that I want to create a city where IT growth will create jobs, IT growth will create money, IT growth will allow Telangana to develop, which historically Andhra Pradesh has not developed, like Bombay or like Delhi. Like checking, that Hyderabad was not a metropolitan area, Andhra Pradesh was not an industrially advanced state like other states. And so Thyrap was trying to have a very clear goal that I want this to lead to economic development.

Malayala has a very clear goal that we recognize employment is a problem. It wants to create employment for people. Betibacha has a very clear goal: we want to educate the girls, right?

So any public policy that you see has a clear objective in mind, and identifying what these objectives are, has a large objective and specific objectives, is also necessary.

And third is, who are you actually targeting with this public policy? When you are formulating policy, you have to clearly determine who is in livelihood. Because I cannot say employment for all, because the government of India does not have money for employment for all. That is why it said only 100 days of work, only for rural populations, only for those that do not otherwise have employment, which clearly determines a category of people who are eligible for that public policy.

Similarly, when we talk about food distribution, there are qualifications for it. And this again, identifying what the target population is, because it helps us connect the doctrine labor stages.

When you look at the implementation stage, you are looking at the practice of deploying public policy. So, Chennai, I'll try to say, okay, my goal is to create an ID hub to create jobs in the future. And that sounds great, but what do you actually do for it?

So he says, "I will make sure that there are enough universities that create engineers for the jobs." That is where Triple IT comes in. That is where certain universities in Hyderabad and surrounding Asia Common are aimed at engineering. This happened in Chennai as well, this happened in Delhi as well, that through the 1980s, more and more universities aimed at engineering and IT engineering started coming up.

So, clearly, there is an interpretation that to meet the goal of an IT industry, the first thing I am doing is I am producing IT engineers. The second thing I am doing is these companies need a place to create offices. So I am holding land and I am giving land for very, very cheap. People are going to live in some place, I'm going to travel to another place, so I will build roads.

Which is why high-tech city roads and financial district roads look very different from old city roads, right? They look nicely ordered; they look like American roads because it is meant to attract American money to Hyderabad for investment. So, the goal can be that I want to convert Hyderabad into an IT city, but what the implementation tells us is: what are the ways to reach that particular goal? So, this allows us to translate from the objective to specific ways. This helps us identify where the money is spent.

And we see clearly in Hyderabad a large portion of money is spent in Telangana, and specifically Hyderabad. What is the most visible expenditure that you see? The unseen infrastructure is digital infrastructure. You heard that there are a lot of data centers coming in under the data technology. Why here? Cheap capacity. Yeah, it's cheaper. But why less assistance from the locals that come back from other states? No, I'm asking a simpler question. I'm asking why the data center should be here and not in, um, Say Jassi. But they have been doing that anyway. Why should the data center come here and not to Chassi? How did they shoppers convert itself to an ID screen? Ah, they don't have water. So there are water resources. What else?

Through the 1990s and the 2000s, the government of Andhra Pradesh spent huge amounts of money on putting fiber-optic cables. Fiber-optic cables that go from Vaisan to Shakhati, to here. And what use is the data center if it is not connected by fiber-optic cables, right? So at some point in time, there is a certain investment in infrastructure. What I am suggesting is, like roads, there is unseen infrastructure by fiber-optic cables, which makes it very, very attractive for data centers to come in. Then you don't have to lay down 5,400 kilometers of cables because those cables already are in place.

And this you will see with what is known as special economic zones, that most of the data centers are coming up in Bombay because Bombay has nursing cables, Chandraikus Chandraika nursing cables, around Kolkata—not directly in Kolkata, near Kolkata, the nursing cables—and places like Bangalore, places like Hyderabad, places like Putna, very simply because historically these have data infrastructures that the government has spent money on at some point in time in history.

So what the implication allows you to look at is: where was the money spent? How were the objectives defined? What sort of process was created? So, e.g., if my policy is everybody will get food, the implementation will be: how is the food going to reach from a job to the poorest person in Kinnada? There has to be some way in which this moves, some way in which the money is paid, some way that somebody is made responsible for it. And this is something that the implementation phase really helps in the plan.

So, like with the formulation phase, where you can clearly identify who, what, what is the objective, etcetera, here you can identify the practice of public policy. And so many studies around 10 to 20 years ago focused on the goal that one of the common goals India has consistently had is food, employment, education.

Over a period of time, we have started linking food, education, and employment with Aadhaar. So, what many people started looking when Aadhaar was being implemented is: does it affect how people are? And they found out that actually, by introducing Anha, Saurya—what example are we talking about now? Saurya. Yeah, please give me a class. Leave the class. You have literally 10 seconds to read the class by leaving the class.

Okay, so when we talk about—what we started realizing is, by introducing Aadhaar, people who were working in the fields and whose components were damaged could not do Aadhaar verification, and therefore they could not get food. Therefore, they would not be able to do it. So what this allows us to see is what happens when a policy is implemented, whether it is actively able to reach its goals or not.

Which brings us to the final listening: understanding outcomes of a policy. There has to be a long-term evaluation of whether that public policy has worked or not. Now, generally, if you look at broad statistics in India, we can see that our larger public policy on education, on food, on employment has certainly improved a certain number of things. But it also tells us that certain people have benefited more, certain people have not benefited as much. Certain regions have grown, certain regions have not really grown. And therefore, the outcome stage is a way of analyzing the quality of public policy to see whether it has actually managed to achieve its particular ends.

So, to give the example to tie everything together, I originally was studying whether digital technology improves governance of cities.

I identified who created urban digital policies, like the Smart City Commission, National Urban Digital Commission, or Hyderabadist thing. I tried to identify what the policies are. Imagine them as boards. So, the policy documents sometimes say that the aim of digitalization is to bring efficiency in government. The aim of digitalization is to improve citizens' participation. The aim of this policy is to create a unified data system.

So, this is something that is identified in policy, but it also evolves. So, don't think of this as static, that five years ago, what we found as an IT policy in Ryder just changed to today. So, that was my first sort of level. I looked at who created public policy and things like this. And basically, people from 46 and Tata Consultancy simply couldn't keep a harmony higher. When I went to the Ministry of Urban Affairs in Delhi, the core bureaucrat in charge of the smart cities had an office on the first floor, but PWC had an office on the tenth floor overlooking all of New Delhi. So clearly, concerns were important. Concerns were stronger than bureaucracy when it comes to contemporary IP points.

So then we started saying, what was the implementation? Implementation took the form of specific platforms created for citizens, specific platforms created for bureaucracy, data exchanges created for bureaucrats, infrastructure created, money spent on the infrastructure of being fiber-opticable, CCDs, or wireless communication networks and speakers, etc.

So then you could clearly identify that when the goal, when it seemed Suggest that this will improve citizens' participation, the implementation of it was not about citizens. It was more about creating digital technology. But they would still argue and say that citizens will use these particular platforms for this purpose. That digital technology will reduce time, digital technology will reduce corruption, etcetera.

So, which brings me to the final stage. I have to come up on a platform where we have two platforms, one for citizen, one for bureaucracy, algorithm it will be bureaucrats. And I look at usage numbers and operations numbers and system-generated reports, and I find that actually the amount of time that bureaucrats take to make decisions has remained the same. While citizens could earlier pay 10 rupees at a citizen service center to get a particular service, now they are unable to get that particular service because that platform kept failing.

Clearly, the objective and the outcome has—there is a clear mismatch, right? But I would not do this without identifying how the implementation took place. I couldn't do this without identifying what was originally imagined. So whenever we look at public policy, this framework allows us to sketch it out.

So this is something that some of us work on. Athos also works on things around data policies, where we try to identify what do we—why are we—so what is who—the data centre policy in India or other states? How was it implemented? Who decided that, yes, we should make land free or water free for this? Somebody simply has to make these decisions. Who decided how much money is okay to spend on this? What was the final format to? Did it actually end up creating more jobs? Did it actually end up creating more revenue for the government? Did it actually end up destroying the environment in that particular region? Did it actually end up cleaning on a farmland in that particular region?

And then you can clearly identify: yes, policy goals have been met, or no, policy goals have not been met. And this is possible to do quantitatively; this is possible to do qualitatively. So, for policy analysis, there is a government-based analysis tools you can use. For implementation, there are budgetary tools you can use. For output sets, as well, there is a lot of system-generated stuff, but there are also qualitative ways of determining how this translates.

Can you just say this is a good enough example to understand the ways in which one translates qualitative this case?

I want to do one little thing, and then I will open up for questions. So, while this seems to suggest that public policy is a clinical step-by-step process, where this leads to this and that leads to that, it's not as simplistic as this, right? It takes time, it takes money, it takes debates.

So, when Mandira came out, I remember the original money that was decided was 150 rupees for men and 120 rupees for women. Thank you. So, around 25 years now, almost 20-odd years ago, one, yeah, UPA One. Thereafter, we have had a lot of data which suggests that employment in rural India has not grown. And in fact, even though people have migrated from rural India to urban India, the kind of jobs that they are doing are not really equal value produced.

There are not enough money. But we realized that in rural India there were multiple problems: farming was no longer profitable, there were no jobs in rural India, and there were families which were not getting income for more than half a year, which is because, if you know farming, you know that income generally comes twice a year only, at the end of each cropping cycle. And there generally follow two cropping cycles.

And this became a crisis because many specialists identified that lack of jobs means that girls are being pulled out of school, which means it leads to lower education numbers. Lack of jobs means women and others are not getting enough food, which means nutrition numbers started declining. Lack of jobs means that dependence on farm incomes increased, which led to things like farmer suicide because farming was not profitable. And there was a very strong [pause] that unless we create employment, this is going to lead to a long-term problem.

And so, the scheme that was introduced at that time was called the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, and then it became an Act of Parliament. So, it was the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. Then it was called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. So it was MGNREGA, and the NDA government about two months ago changed it to V. B. G. RAM G, which is something.

But the idea was this: because we recognize that the state of agriculture in India is a problem, because we identified that rural populations are facing a problem, we are going to provide at least a hundred days of work in rural areas. Which means any person in rural India who wants to have a job, the state will provide a job. And these were small jobs like digging canals by the road, or digging a well, or making small embankments.

So there were certain rules which were in the implementation phase: that projects up to one lakh could be done using only local laborers and not outside laborers. It was just a way of getting the work done. But at that time, the first scheme, I remember, had something like 140 rupees per day for males and 120 for women.

And experts pointed out that, first of all, this is clearly against the principle of equality: that you are assuming women should be paid less than men. Second, that 140 aggregates. Actually, it puts people below the poverty line. And the government is saying they are giving you money, but not even money that is enough to cross the poverty line.

And so a lot of economists, a lot of sociologists, and a lot of people working in rural India started telling the government that this is not feasible, this will not improve the quality of life, it could potentially make it worse as well, and there are reasons for it.

And therefore, it was equalized. Men and women got equal pay because specialists stepped in and said policy needs to have an equal outcome. And it has been activated to one of the largest employment schemes in the world. We have spent a lot of money on it, and even though it was implemented for UPA One, it has been continued under UPA Two, under NDA One, and NDA Two.

Everybody in the government has got a job. So everybody believes that rural employment is necessary in this country. But if you look at people who have done outcomes of it, they have showed that MGNREGA has improved the quality of life, has improved incomes, and has brought about certain improvements in indicators.

But it has also identified that local political leaders got richer because they would take the money back from the farmers. That local dadas and middlemen would put their money—they would show that this person has received the money, but they actually would pocket the money themselves. It shows that there were false reports created, et cetera, et cetera.

It also shows that in some parts of the country you can work with less, even though the opportunity policy was equal. And so, anyway, if you look at the studies of MGNREGA, and there are multiple studies of MGNREGA and of Aadhaar, you will find that often objectives in the policy do not necessarily match up with the outcomes of public policy. Sometimes they do, sometimes they do not. And it's a good thing to constantly keep evaluating because then you go back to the start and you suggest a field of policy.

Again, around 15 years ago, we started something called the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, where we realized that primary school teachers, primary school students in India, and secondary school students were not really learning as much, that there were, however, dropouts, and that, of course, in certain regions there weren't enough teachers and things like this.

So, in the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, there was a national policy that every state should spend a certain amount of money to hire teachers. Teachers will have to stay in school for three more hours to sit with students who are failing and things like that.

And again, studies of that showed that there are certain benefits that came out of services, while certain things continue to remain quite there. So one level of study is looking at this, looking at how formulation, social implementation, and how we evaluate outcomes. You can do this numerically, you can do this quantitatively, you can do this in computation, you can do this qualitatively by looking at vocabulary, by looking at experiences of people who benefited or did not benefit from these schemes, etcetera.

The final thing I want to do, which is important, is not only about the mismatch between formulation and outcomes, but it is about how the government ensures that public policy is implemented. So how do you encourage the implementation and the deployment of public policy? So we use a particular term for it; we call it policy instruments.

Policy instruments can be subsidies, they can be live lands, they can be punishments, there can be platforms, etcetera. So, just to explain, when Chandrababu Naidu wants to make Kerala into a lady city, what he does is, this land is given to you for ₹1 for 99 years. So he is providing a subsidy, he is providing a benefit for the company to set it up.

When the Indian government wants to ensure that everybody, well, that the country's education statistics are raised, it issues a set of guidelines that all government schools in India should follow. If a particular state did not perform well in MGNREGA, did not provide employment, the central government would punish it by not releasing money for something else.

The Indian government has often released platforms such as Aadhaar for all states to implement, which means that if you want to develop a regional scheme for who or whatever else, you have to use this platform. So, in the Smart Cities Mission—sorry, in the National Urban Digital Mission—the Indian government has released one platform that all municipalities in India should use, should immediately use.

So, this is also saying that, okay, you as a municipality may not know how to create a digital platform. So the government is providing one for you. So this is also an issue.

Now, all of these are generally under a mini mode. They are generally classified as my favorite, sermons, carrots, and sticks, where you give a sermon on what you should do in order to reach the end. Or you provide carrots, or you provide benefits in these books, or punish if you are not performing as per the policy, then you should be impuned for it.

So when you look at the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, you have seen these random paintings of girl and mother carrying waste and dumping Buddha and the Buddha, or these television advertisements. You have seen these? They are essentially what we can clearly advertise sermons, right? Or the very disturbing advertisements before the beginning of a film which tell you, do not smoke, do not smoke, do not smoke. It's a sermon, right? The government is telling you, please do this in a service, this. But you can be punished for smoking in a public place, your subsidy can be removed because you did not have a clean city, etcetera.

Does this make sense? So identifying these instruments is also an important thing to understand how this takes place. Sorry, I'm just going to take two more minutes.

What political scientists and public policy experts are identified, and for this I use Lascoumes and Le Galès, suggest that it's not as simple as formulation, implementation, outcomes. It's not as simplistic as these are means to encourage public policy. What they argue and what they suggest is that these instruments or public policies are not neutral things.

They are not a way to build roads. They are not a way to ensure people. It's not as simple as that. What they argue is that these public policies are shaped by active relations, social relations within the country or within that particular region.

So, for example, last time in class, the criticism is that yes, one could see that the regional ring road is aimed at benefiting the IT industry, but if you actually start evaluating who made the most money, you will find that people who own land in this area, who happen to be certain parts of Hyderabad and Telangana, they made the maximum amount of money, even probably more than some IT companies.

Even though the public policy was aimed at economic growth for the region, it created economic growth for certain powerful castes and certain powerful communities. Studies have shown that, you know, the exits from the ORR, then people get off. Who do you think made that decision? The engineers, the urban specialists, and where the exit from an ORR should be. One would like to think that is the case, right? It's almost automatically MAs and MA.

To decide that the existence of major highways should because they tend to own land in these regions and therefore it benefits themselves more than it benefits others. There are more than enough studies of the infrastructure in India that show that specific places are connected generally. Yes, they do lead to economic growth, but they end up benefiting specific groups more than others.

So maybe this is—we don't have time—but that's what I say: that we need to look at public policy more critically to identify how these operators are set, which objectives are met, what is the real purpose of public policy, what are the social determinations of public policy, etcetera, etcetera.

Okay, I am going to stop now. I hate the lecture format because we only had one class. This is the format I chose, but if you have questions, I'm willing to answer them because this is what I recommended in the syllabus: you can choose any one colleague policy and try to read it in this particular field.

Questions? Okay, when you start. Well, I will see you all then for the next of the semester.

I did see. In fact, because the big problem we had is that it was not a C D F C certified film. There are two films who have the same director, which are C D L C certified. And you should go on this screen and will identify it because there are legal films. The first one is called Why the Branch, and the second one is called Management Deal, or whatever.

The individual for that? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, sharp, oh, yeah.

So then maybe the first boy in the branch visits four young boys who are members of RSS Charter and mandately visits them ten years later to see what their views are, whether they are the same, whether the views are changed or not. And it's the same director who made this particular prisoner failed. And it's both of them are the elevation for this. And they are C D F C approved, so I am not committing a correct idea also.

Yeah, yeah, they are singular. Why did they not have to work with us? Except the last one, most of them, the group is in the service. India goes into the group and even here. So it's not—it's only—it's not specific to NGO in the year.

Like UPA government also, I remember when Final Solution by Rakhik Shahman came out, it was, I don't know, four and a half hours till it was seriously different allowed to be. They cut it down to two hours. And we used to other private screenings or the file screen. But that was private screening.

But I remember when CBC cut it down from five to two, it was unreasonable to assume they were, but they are not in the award. So it's sometimes not independent on the zero and not. But yeah, I mean, free speech and all.

So we have data and we have to go to the high level. After seeing that, what do you actually do? So we can say that certainly nationalism becomes more—it becomes an idea or initiative. First of all, nationalism has who is the highest.

Nazism has nationalism that is not focused. So what you consider is that there is a poor political idea and it is national. There are political nationalism. So the legality is by itself the true, which is not a good ideological, because it's too broad, like Islamic system, right?

So identifying a specific ideological form of question is—and sometimes, you know, we keep talking about only—but there is the same thing.

I met like four or five programming players in the all this time area. I will not know exactly as you can get. What did he say?
