Okay, so any other questions related to the substantive theme of what are states, why are states important, where do states come from, and what do we mean when we say a state? Did the sparks be intuitive?

So we did hear a bit about states being mainly federal and democratic states, in opposition to being looked at as a capitalistic state, which is something like... Could there be any other system that is not really a state that still exists in the modern world? And is it a lot of, like, tribes and islands? But how did this setting?

I mean, so there are collectivized states, in that those tend to be the problem, that they tend to become colonial. They don't start out as colonial, but they tend to become colonial. They tend to become occupied. So there have been experiments for collectivized states, which is one in which everybody participates together in state making, but also everybody produces together. And it borrows heavily from Stalinist Marxism, and there are other non-Stalinist schools.

So there are anarchist models that work. Anarchist models which say, do away with the end of the state. Are there examples of anarchists, even for a short period of time?

Yeah, so there are these things known as communes, which, I mean, they are not at the scale of the state; they are at the scale of a city or a neighborhood. So there are more civil society non-violence. But there is also a great film called The Beach. It's also, I don't know, it's about this guy who lives on the beach, which is secluded; it's an island that he's from, and he becomes a member of a group of people who live on that island, and they do not want to have rules, they do not want to have a state, et cetera. So it's a nice narrative about that.

Yes, sir?

You said that the idea was a narrative, where you say it was a market? It was a market. And the guys from here, they came here, and I know someone that, you said that the great thing about after basically taking power from the village people in 1600, again the village people, back then, and it was in Bulgaria, something like that, they were saying they had a kind of religious thing, they were in that village market, and that's why they put it in that area, so that it would be religious.

Okay, so the question is, yes. I mean, the Buddhist model, or all models that we want to find a balance. So there's the Ukrainian one, or I'm trying to think of the larger examples. They are known for presenting an alternative idea, which they tend to be short, either because it falls apart or because somebody takes it over. But I'm trying to think of a good model, but it's very hard to get, because that also points to how the scale is, or the scale is, so it's not something that can, identity is a state that follows for a state, for a state. So, yeah, so the second thing is, what I said is, as I said, the state is a modern institution. It's something that escapes older forms of rule, most notably monarchy, and most notably colonization and colonialism. And so we are looking at a modern institution; that's the thing that keeps it.

So whether the modern institution is anti-technical, let me rephrase that question: does a modern state need to be a secular state, and does a modern state need to not have religious—does it need to be an egalitarian liberal democracy, as opposed to a religious state?

Maybe not a liberal democracy directly, but a secular egalitarian state, normatively it will not.

Yeah, so generally it's something that we'll talk about in the separatist question as well, but it's essentially how does the state perceive its members, right? So in a state like Iran, or in a state like Saudi Arabia, non-Muslims who visit these states are afforded a different set of expectations and privileges than Muslims of that state. So that's one part of it.

The other part of it is the state itself: even though it may have a religious nature to it, does it represent a public institution? Does it represent a public process? Does it represent a public general rule? So, for example, Iran would argue that it is the result of hundreds of years of cultural history and religious history and anti-colonial history that makes them choose a religious identity.

So the distinction between a homogeneous state versus a heterogeneous state, where the majority of the population is one particular group versus multiple groups. So those are not necessarily anti-technical.

If one was saying that, a good exception to it is Brunei. Because Brunei is not only a religious state, but it is also still very much a monarchy. It's still very much a theocratic monarchy, where one man, one family, defined by the state.

Similarly, Saudi Arabia as well. Until a fair few years ago, Saudi Arabia was considered as an older theocratic monarchy. But over the years it is trying to modernize its institutions, maybe more than that.

So this is what the United Arab Emirates did very clearly. They said, yes, we are a religious monarchy, but for anyone who resides in our territory, we follow modern laws, modern institutions, modern processes, etc. I mean, laws not so much, but actual institutions of working will both let the bureaucracy in the US, will both let the bureaucracy in India, whatever. So, religiosity itself may not discredit us, but if it is a monarchy combined with a distinct, which doesn't have public institutions, then it would definitely not be considered a good model of a state. And this is why Brunei really fails in multiple levels. Brunei never has, it's not even shown any indicator of having public model institutions.
Nepal, sorry, Bhutan, on the other hand, even though it is a monarchy, the current king of Bhutan has already declared that, you know, they are a little more than three decades old, that they are a modern state, that they follow constitutions, that they have public laws, that they have public institutions, etc. And over the last decade, the current king, he has been actively promoting this idea of handing it over to only the public, the democratic institutions. But generally, just religiously or just monarchy does not mean that it doesn't need to apply to a religious state. Okay, so we move on today and go into the domain of citizenship. And we will talk about, I don't know, Akshay Kumar and his citizenship. So, what I do is, in this class, we'll have a larger back and forth discussion, and in the next class, we'll organize it into clear ways of looking at what does it mean to be a citizen. So, I have a couple of prompts for you. Who is a citizen? That's my first last question. The second is, what do you get by being a citizen? What is specific to citizenship? The third is, what is the relationship between the citizen and the state? The first is a defining question, who can be considered a citizen? Second is understanding what does it really mean in practice to be a citizen? And third is that citizenship in some way indicates having a relationship with an institution, and that institution is the state. So, how do you understand this relationship? But these are the prompt questions. This is what I'm trying to address in today's class to get a sense of what you mean. And when we try to answer these questions, I want you to think, I want to try and think both normatively and empirically, which means there are certain things as they are, which you have learned from the news and from reading, hopefully, and other places. And there are things which you perceive someone to be or something to be. So, wherever you're going to answer a question, try to justify on what does it really mean. Are you taking a normative position? Are you describing the situation? But these are the prompt questions. This is what I'm trying to address in today's class to get a sense of what you mean. And when we try to answer these questions, I want you to think, I want to try and think both normatively and empirically, which means there are certain things as they are, which you have learned from the news and from reading, hopefully, and other places. And there are things which you perceive someone to be or something to be. So, wherever you're going to answer a question, try to justify on what does it really mean. Are you taking a normative position? Are you describing the situation? But these are the prompt questions. This is what I'm trying to address in today's class to get a sense of what you mean. And when we try to answer these questions, I want you to think, I want to try and think both normatively and empirically, which means there are certain things as they are, which you have learned from the news and from reading, hopefully, and other places. And there are things which you perceive someone to be or something to be. So, wherever you're going to answer a question, try to justify on what does it really mean. Are you taking a normative position? Are you describing the situation? But these are the prompt questions. This is what I'm trying to address in today's class to get a sense of what you mean. And when we try to answer these questions, I want you to think, I want to try and think both normatively and empirically, which means there are certain things as they are, which you have learned from the news and from reading, hopefully, and other places. And there are things which you perceive someone to be or something to be. So, wherever you're going to answer a question, try to justify on what does it really mean. Are you taking a normative position? Are you describing the situation?
But these are the prompt questions. This is what I'm trying to address in today's class to get a sense of what you mean.

And when we try to answer these questions, I want you to think—I want to try and think—both normatively and empirically, which means there are certain things as they are, which you have learned from the news and from reading, hopefully, and other places. And there are things which you perceive someone to be or something to be. So, wherever you're going to answer a question, try to justify on what does it really mean. Are you taking a normative position? Are you describing the situation? But these are the prompt questions. This is what I'm trying to address in today's class to get a sense of what you mean.

Asking for rights. So there is feminist who ask for rights, there is environmentalists who ask for rights, there is native populations that ask for rights, etc. So that is one such thing.

The third is what we spoke about in bi-dilaturalism, that the world was rapidly changing to include the second and third class of the world, and these people started asking for their rights as well. And through the Second World War, that whether it is the Cold War or whether it is the partition of India and Pakistan or whether it is these new countries that were born and there were lines drawn across, there is a very significant question of who belongs where or where does one come from and therefore what is one supposed to do. And these questions become extremely important because the same kind of demands or similar kind of demands start being asked from different parts of the world in their different individual contexts.

More importantly, closer to home, we had the attempted passing of the Citizenship Act, the CBA, NRC, Citizenship Amendment Act and the National Registry for Citizens, which tries to redefine what is meant by a citizen. There is a constitutional idea of a citizen and there is a new idea of a citizen that is aimed to replace the old idea of a citizen, which also means that this idea of who is a citizen is also an evolving idea. And I don't know if you guys were probably in high school or something, is when the CJT protest, that time there were a lot of protests taking place before the pandemic when the Citizenship Amendment Act was passed.

And even today, I don't know if you have read these notices, there is a 70-year-old man being posted to Bangladesh because he was declared as not being a citizen. And the guy was a government school teacher for 40 years in West Bengal. But suddenly somewhere, somebody decided this person is no longer in India and therefore is a Bangladeshi and has to be posted to that side. So they literally pushed him into the no man's land between India and Bangladesh and said, you go there. He returned after one year after a lot of legal battles.

Have you read Bhopal Singh? Do you guys study Manto in school? Sorry, in class? No? Okay, so Manto is writing—he used to write very short stories around the time of the Partition. And you'll find, like, clearly Radcliffe has many copies. So after the Partition of India and Pakistan, Manto came and lived in India. He used to write for films, he was a film writer, but he wrote a lot of good short stories. And there is a set of Partition stories that Manto writes, which are about the horrors of Partition.

But my favorite story in short stories by Manto is called Bhopal Singh. It is, sometimes it's spelled with a B, sometimes it's spelled with a D, because it's translated from Urdu to Urdu. So Bhopal Singh is a nice short story that Manto writes. It's that when India and Pakistan become separate, we decide to separate, we decide to split our assets. So I don't know if you see this famous picture in the National Library, where there's a big desk and somebody's deciding which books go to India and which books stay in Pakistan. Similarly, we know that the Radcliffe line was drawn in the line between India and Pakistan. But there were many similar discussions on what should go in which museum, for example.

So the really funny thing is this other Radcliffe called Manto. So when Manto came to India, Chukdar went to Pakistan. And Chukdar was a painter, he was a very good painter. And he was appointed by the government of Pakistan to make the postage stamps of Pakistan. So he was like an artist, a really high-tech one.

But the best place to see Chukdar's paintings is if you go to the National Museum in Delhi; they have a majority of his paintings. So even though he went to Pakistan, his assets were sold in India as a definition of modern India. The point I'm trying to make is that there was this division going on between what goes to India and what goes to Pakistan. So Bhopal Singh is this lovely story in Manto where someone in the bureaucracy realized that we are going to put books on the inside, furniture on the inside, villages on the inside, but we don't really know where the patients in a mental asylum should go, whether they belong to India or whether they belong to Pakistan. And so it's about one particular mentally ill person, Bhopal Singh, and the government is trying to decide whether he should go to India or whether he should go to Pakistan. And that's the story: Bhopal Singh is in the middle of no man's land, and they didn't make this decision. So I'm taking the example of Bhopal Singh and connecting it to this code that was pushed into Bangladesh 70 years, 75 years later. But the principle is exactly the same, that someone somewhere belongs here but does not belong there, and someone somewhere belongs there but does not belong here. So even though largely, and on the other side, conversely, we do have a significant—I don't know if you've noticed, but in the last 12 years, if I'm not mistaken, the number of people giving up Indian citizenship and adopting citizenship of another country has grown in a steep manner. There is, unlike historically what is called brain drain, a very clear shift of giving up Indian citizenship and adopting foreign countries' citizenship, which is of course made possible by better incomes, more mobility, etc. And at the same time, you as a population are going to be mobile. You are probably going to leave India at some point of time, whether for education or for work, and you'll have to navigate this business of immigration, visas, citizenship, passports, as you go along. And there are motivations, you know. All of us can count the number of people who, when I was getting older, told me, "Yeah, yeah, I'm going, but life will be better, and I want to come back after 10 years to build my family." It's been 25 years, and not a single person has come back. But there's a possibility. There are people who come back, notably like Shah Rukh Khan and Suresh, again, great film. So the point I'm trying to make is, yeah, I mean, citizenship in political science is the iron word, but citizenship is very much a part of our everyday life. It's very much something that we are engaged with, something that we recognize, even though we may not actively use it so much. And citizenship is powerful enough that after 20 years or something, even Akshay Kumar gave up his Canadian citizenship and adopted Indian citizenship. So there are important decisions to be made, whether at the personal level or at the platform level or at the international level. So what we are going to do over the next class is we're going to formally look at what does it mean, what does being a citizen mean, what does citizenship mean, how do we understand it conceptually, how do we understand it normatively, how do we understand it empirically. So we'll do all of that in a structured manner. But in this particular class, I wanted to start with this initial thinking: generally, on an everyday basis, it's not like you are oblivious to it; it is around you. You cannot actively practice it or you cannot actively use it, but citizenship is pretty much part of our everyday life.

Is there a thing all of you have read or pledged in school or something like this, or affirms your commitment to citizenship of India and England? It's also there in other documents that we have, in our passports. Okay, so let's start with the... Okay, I need to read some book. I lost my voice. Hold on a second. Yeah, so... Yeah, what is it to be a citizen? Or what is citizenship? You can use your vocabulary; there's nothing to research. It's an open conversation.

To be a citizen is to agree to follow the laws and regulations.

Okay, so you are taking... I'm going to take a comment, and I will send it to you later. So say that again: to be a citizen is?

To agree to follow the laws and regulations.

To agree to follow laws and regulations. Okay, I'm not going to use country; I'm going to use state. There is a small problem with this. In the United States, and in the 20, around 18-year period in India's history, if you are born in the US, you are a US citizen. If you are born in that 18-year period in India's history, you are an Indian citizen. Before 1986, so if you are born before 1986, within the territory of India, you are a citizen of India. If you are born in the US, regardless of your parents' nationality, you are an American citizen. But if I'm born and I become a citizen, that is the quick point of being a citizen.

I never agreed to follow American rules. I never agreed to follow Indian rules. So in practice, in empirical practice, this isn't easily going to do. So you can almost choose to leave the situation. That's secondary, that is post-fact. I mean, how does it really determine your decision? That is also arbitrary. Some countries consider eating into attaining full citizenship status. Some countries recognize it, which tracks the voting rights.

So my problem with this is the notion of agreement. But we can put that aside for now and take what you said. Is citizenship, citizen should follow laws and regulations? That is a non-native statement. Citizens follow laws and regulations? That's an empirical statement, even though it's not necessarily true. So agree or not, I want to deal with it. So we can do that later. Peter?

State recognizes the person in general. I'm going to use individual. And that is? Okay. As part of a permanent population. So if a state has a permanent population, a state has a boundary, you are saying that the state recognizes the individual as a part of it.

My slight problem with this is it's top-down, where somebody needs to recognize you. So to go back to that same example, a child born in the United States, do they need to be recognized by a position of authority in order to be a citizen? Okay. So the secondary question is, what are the tenets of this recognition? Which means if a state can recognize, a state can also dis-recognize. So how does the state decide whether one should recognize them as a member or not? That's my question. We have an answer here, but it's something to think about.

Okay, but clearly you're using recognition as a key distinction, right? Formulation, okay. So one might make the argument that state recognizes individual and individual recognizes state as citizenship. Let's try to modulate that. Maybe. Okay. Okay.

But UIN, you are working vocabully of rights, that being a citizen means you're entitled to certain rights. Okay. Anything else? Isn't the rights part a part of the recognition? Isn't the recognition individual by the virtue of recognition of rights? Or is there something else? In the state recognizes you? In the virtue of recognition of a member of the state, you have rights. But it's a citizen of the state.

Okay, so let's, I would not, yes, I will say it is separate, but I will say it can be included here. So the state laws and regulation, the state grants rights. Is that what you're saying? That's not necessarily right. Like if you look at the boxes of the right, you don't need to have rights.

Okay, so right now for this purpose, you're leaving out Hobbes and Rousseau and all of this, okay? For the time being, just because we'll come to that anyway in the next class. But also because I want to draw attention that I'm not bound by a theoretical thing. So there is possible, I want to lay out it. So I'm trying to identify characteristics.

So the first characteristic identified was that there seems to be laws and regulations that govern a citizen. So which helps us answer this question: how does a state recognize the individual? They recognize it through laws. I'm going to say regulations, but I'm going to keep it in there.

The second thing is, being a citizen or a citizen grants you rights. Does that mean that constituents do not have rights? Not given by the state. Okay. I think it's a part of the state that manages the constitution. Yeah, but my question is slightly different. I'm asking that if you are... So I'm an Indian, I'm a citizen, I know the rights I have as a state. If an individual comes from outside India to India, do they have rights or do they not have rights?

They don't have the same citizenship rights as... We can't use the free citizenship right because it is self-disillusioned, right? They are certain rights, they don't get access to citizenship, they don't have rights. Okay. Akash, do you want to write that? I think they will be denied rights from the government. Okay. Not really, but okay. They do have rights, but then it's a different set of rights.

Okay, so what this analysis is... You could make the distinction of constituent rights and non-allied and pre-rights, right? The reason the Aussie doesn't have rights in my country is because of my relationship with him, but they don't have any rights because of the non-constituents, my contribution has drawn my rights. Okay.

I think it's a part of the state that manages the constitution. Yeah, but my question is slightly different. I'm asking that if you are... So I'm an Indian, I'm a citizen, I know the rights I have as a state. If an individual comes from outside India to India, do they have rights or do they not have rights? They don't have the same citizenship rights as... We can't use the free citizenship right because it is self-disillusioned, right? They are certain rights, they don't get access to certain rights. Okay. Akash, do you want to write that? I think they will be denied rights from the government. Okay. Not really, but okay. They do have rights, but then it's a different set of rights. Okay. So what this analysis is... You could make the distinction of constituent rights and non-allied and pre-rights, right? The reason the Aussie doesn't have rights in my country is because of my relationship with him, but they don't have any rights because of the non-constituents, my contribution has drawn my rights. Okay. I think what I understood was... I just need to ask you something. Maybe we can start with the syllabus that I shared with you. This is... Yeah. For the one class...

So the broad categorization that we can make at this particular stage is fundamentally there are something called as human rights. Human rights are universal. Even if you go to another country, they should ideally not interfere with your fundamental right to life, right to liberty. You should not be arrested without reason and so on and so forth. But there is a specific set of rights, as you were saying in this conversation, there is a specific set of rights that citizens, state rights. This is not really what we consider as not, I mean constitution is not needed, constitution also recognizes human rights. So for the time being, I'm going to just say that there is a set of political rights, that there is something specifically political about citizenship, which is not there in your general human rights. A big part of what we are understanding in this, for example, is voting rights. The right to vote is a political right, but non-citizens do not have the right to vote. They have other human rights. They have the right to education, they have the right to healthcare, they have the right to freedom of speech and expression, so on and so forth. But they do not have the right to vote, because the right to vote is a very specific right that is a political right of that particular country or state or city. So we have something called supreme sovereign authority, like this state has authority over this person, that can be about their decisions. So that's what I mean: not all states, modern states, do not have this distinction of people not given rights because they are not members. Generally, after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, after the Second World War, there are multiple conventions and treaties, etc., etc., where countries recognize the need to recognize rights of people even though they will not be citizens. So it may not really hold the test of that long run, that it's about us, let me use your phrase now. Also, on the other hand, I think there is something called supreme sovereign authority, like this state can do whatever it wants to its citizens. So now that becomes like a journey. Okay, but again, the problem with that is, sure, the state may define who it wants to be more set of rights, right? And this is a big problem with citizenship because, as we will see, the state does not always give political rights to all its citizens also. And we will talk about that in a couple of minutes. Yeah?

The question is, is a resident different from a citizen?

Okay, so that's a good question. Is a resident different from a citizen? So very, very legally, there are different categories or different... There's a spectrum of citizenship, membership, residential, etc. So you can live your entire life in the US without getting American citizenship. But you have residency rights. In the UK, you can get residency rights, but those residency rights cannot be translated into citizenship rights in some cases. Like, for example, if you are a student, it's not like after four years you can transfer easily. It's not a shift from one right to another. Certain states actively give residency status until your death, but will never give you citizenship. Japan is one of those states, right? So yes, you're absolutely right that there may be multiple ways in which the state recognizes your status. Residential status is very, very different from citizenship status. In fact, it should not be confused with either. Visitor status is also very, very different from resident status. So they are different... Yeah, a spectrum is a good way to put it. Somebody who's not spoken before, I haven't given a chance to speak. Okay, go ahead. I have a question. Can you speak up? No, I'm not very good at speaking. Okay.

So when the West Indies cricket team went to South Africa in the late 1980s, South Africa had apartheid, which means blacks and whites could not be in the same places. So blacks could not travel in white apartments and white modes of transport and things like this. When the West Indies cricket team went to South Africa in the late 1980s, they were promised temporary residency, which means they would get the same treatment as white people. This prompted some people of the West Indies team not to go, saying that it used to be, you know, you used to have a tie for sports like this, and some people went.

But this is an important part of whether citizenship is something that is temporary. In the case of South Africa, it was a very unspoken arrangement. It was not really the actual documentation of the US citizenship. And I'm sure the research was still pretty much there in America at this situation at that time.

But what I'm trying to make is that we need to normatively ask ourselves: Is citizenship something that is temporary? Is citizenship something that is permanent? Is citizenship something that is transferable? Is citizenship something that can be earned? What are the ways of defining what a citizen is, and how can something become a citizen? It's a normative question.

I'd like to ask a bigger question of who exactly a citizen is, because, as we can see in India right now, there's no clear definition of who is a citizen. So how do we define that? We pose it as a normative question: Who is a citizen?

That's my fundamental question to you before looking at what are rights and all of this. Thank you for going back to the basics, back to the fundamentals. If I were to have a starting vantage point saying, "I will try to answer the question of who is a citizen," I'm asking this as a normative question to you. According to you, who should be a citizen?

Because who is a citizen, we can answer that in India: anyone born in the territory of India, anyone born in 1987, and anyone born on this day is a citizen, et cetera. In this particular country's context, a citizen. Empirically, we can answer that, right, because we have laws and rules that deal with these cases. In India, it's a bit of a hazy situation right now, and we'll come to that over the next class and next class.

But fundamentally, who should be a citizen? Someone who is recognized by the state and someone who plays a significant role in the state. So that's the normative question: Who should the state recognize as a citizen?

So hold on, if somebody has a—yeah?

Someone who is a part of the Constitution or has a role in the state.

But see, that always holds true for somebody who wants to become a citizen of another country. When you apply for another citizenship, you have to give a test, you have to answer certain questions. When you do a German citizenship, you have to answer a set of questions, you have to learn the language, et cetera, before you can become a citizen. So those are late-life questions. That's an empirical question: How does one become a citizen? How does one become a citizen of Guatemala, for instance?

Forget that. Fundamentally, forget anything else. You are a group of 100 people that hang around in the campaign every day. A new person comes, arrives on the scene. How do these 100 people decide whether that person is going to be a member of your group or not going to be a member? That's the question. Who are you willing to recognize as a citizen? Who should you willingly recognize? That's the question.

So forget somebody who is willing to take the oath of allegiance. No, that is a secondary matter when somebody wants to. But primarily, as a state, what normative issue do you have to consider?

So then it depends on people in the group. Let's say there are, I mean, something in common.

Okay, okay. At some point, you guys have to learn how to think in abstraction. It doesn't need to be an object in three dimensions and stuff. Fundamentally, it's a very simple question: How does an entity recognize whether somebody is its member or not?

Membership to a club is based on whether you have the financial capacity, whether you have contacts and connections, whether you are a resident of the area or not, et cetera. But citizenship is large, it's super large. I mean, there are ways to get citizenship by paying money, but I'm going to go to that. So anyone who is in here, there's no easy way.

But Abhishek Kumar was just visiting India when he was born because he chose to leave, so he should not be a citizen. And that point is very good. You are thinking of a 20-year-old individual who wants to leave or wants to come back. Forget that, but you remember Rawls and Veil of Inference? Go beyond Veil of Inference. You don't know anybody. You don't know whether that person is rich, poor, et cetera.

From that position, according to you, who should be your citizen? There are certain benefits that a person can be joining a group and certain gaps that he can fill. Not too long an answer.

Next. Anyone who can contribute economically. Again, it is post, you don't remember a child is born, whether they can contribute to the economy or not. And the same for people who are not really economically productive. They are still consuming things given by the state, so they are participating in the economy somehow, even if they are not contributing. A paraplegic who cannot move, they are still eating food. The food is coming from the economic activity of the state.

So why? I mean, the family could be a rich family; they don't need state support. Again, this family is getting the food from somewhere else. Yeah, they are paying money to survive. But money is also part of the economic activity. But I went to Europe on a friendship with another. I spent money in France. Okay, fine.

Anyone who is at least one of their parents is already a citizen? Anyone who is one of their parents and is a citizen, their grandfather is a citizen. How do you prove your parents' citizenship? There are legal, formal ways to do it, but yeah, it's always a big question.

So, I am just like, really stupid loophole. My mother was not born in India; she was born outside. But the embassy gave her a letter saying, which I would want to use, this person is an Indian citizen, because the embassy can recognize your birth as an Indian citizen. But the current CAA and RC says that if your parents are not born in India, then you can't be a citizen. But my mom was in India when she was born. So, that is a confusing thing, but okay.

So, I am taking this particular thing that Shalia said in one particular way, which is, if an individual is born to citizens, then they are citizens. Okay? There are disagreements, but I am telling you, I accept this. I am taking, haan, yeh shat theek hai. Does anybody have a problem with that?

I still think it's a circular argument. You are trying to define the idea of citizenship using the term citizenship.

Yeah, because we have not answered the clear question: what does citizenship entail? It's an infinite loop. Now we can talk about the parents' citizenship, but the citizenship is defined by their parents, and their citizenship is defined by their parents.

Yeah, but it's not infinite. It stops in 1947.

For us, sure, but... In the US...

1776.

Yeah, I mean... What if you do not have records of people, your ancestors?

It's okay. It's human. It records and everything. Again, normative words we are not defining. The rules can be set out.

So, if I take this to be the normative principle, that if children born to citizens are citizens, then I can create a set of rules on how to prove your parenthood, how to prove your lineage, how to prove your way of birth, etc. That's what governments empirically do. But I'm saying this is probably one nice normative principle. Okay?

Born on the land. Born within the same territory of the state. Born within the same territory of the state. The United States model. Okay?

So, that means being born in this particular region grants me this membership. I may choose to leave it for all those who were talking about leaving and joining and migration and other services, which is perfectly fine. I may choose to leave it at a later stage, but the fact that I am born here gives me that entitlement. Okay? This is the second normative statement I'm willing to agree to. Does anybody have any problem with this?

Yeah. I feel like there are some other countries that say that once you get to a certain age, they're necessarily going to be citizens of the country.

Which country?

Let's just take an example. Let's just say someone comes there, they're doing Indian, they're doing an Egyptian, there's something more to it in those cases than just being born there. But you're still born there, you're living your own life, you should be a citizen.

But yeah, that's sort of the point. So you're adding one layer to it, which is not only being born here, but you should spend some amount of time here.

Not just time here, but time is a big factor. And also, how much time is that? That's a normative thing. We just have done normative; there's no way to end it.

But normative?

Yeah, sure, yeah. Spending some time, being born and spending some time. Okay.

Yeah. Then this whole thing makes sense, no? That everyone born in the territory should be a citizen. Because you're literally saying that the people there, it's only because they're born in the territory that they're citizens. And they've been born and they've been living back at the beginning.

Plus, if they ever choose to move to the citizenship, that should be a...

They don't even know India, I mean, as a political entity, that they don't choose to move. But if they choose to move there in the future, they can.

Can I put my point up again?

Yes. Contribute economically. If they want to vote economically, I'm going to say not part of the... I mean, so if you're below 18, you can't be a citizen.

No, I agree. Because those below 18 are not allowed to vote.

You're saying even consumption is an economic activity.

Yeah, it's an indirect contribution.

But that's what I'm saying. Six months you spend in France or Germany or whatever, you contribute to the economy, you give the cigarette-wala his money, you give the party shop your money, so automatically you become a citizen. Or you use the food.

Huh?

Or you use the food.

Yeah. Pretty slippery slope. Like contributing to the state anyway, which the other two, like, just the ground jobs.

But what is this contribution to the state anyway? So tomorrow, for instance, the state says, you know, tomorrow morning, I wish you to do yoga. As a norm, I don't want you to do yoga. Does that make me a non-citizen?

No, not with the...

It can be any contribution, any economic activity. It can be with your labor.

What would I contribute in heart?

You know, there was this one classmate of mine in undergraduate. For some reason, this classmate loved Australia. Their lifelong pursuit was to go to Australia. They had never visited Australia, but they had any possible Australian citizenship they could think of. They graduated and they went to Australia. And they were... I mean, once they were from another country...

But this person wanted to be an Australian for some unfathomable reason. And the big thing they had on their side was heart. They just wanted to be there. And they somehow became a citizen of that country. Is that what you're saying?

No. Along with the economic contribution.

Economic contribution.

In words, they'll have a balance. This need, this need to, like, be Obesians or be a part of the state, it's a little confusing to me. Because you either have to be productive, or you have to be a part of the economy, or you have to have a socialistic thing, or you need to have something or the other.

Why, on the other hand, somebody who lives in a remote corner, who have never seen, who 20 generations will never see, my 20 generations, they also have citizens. They don't contribute to the economy. They don't pay to go to cement.

Let's go back to ancient Greece.

Whoever owns land.

Whoever owns land.

But what about very few people?

I don't care about very few people.

I don't know. I don't own land.

You don't own land.

You don't own land. You can go bye-bye.

I think that anyone who is dependent on the citizen, and whoever is dependent on, who is dependent on the citizen, or who can choose to be a citizen.

But that at least is a good argument. Because the pre-citizen thing is a bit confusing.

If you're an adult, you can choose to be a citizen.

Yeah. If you're not an adult, you're going to be dependent on an adult.

You're going to be?

Dependent on an adult. Be it your family or your guardian or whatever. And they can choose to be independent.

Okay, so generally, this is a plus code. I'll ask an argumentative question. Because I'll make it complex.

Okay.

If you spend so much time, then automatically, no. Like that, you give a simpler answer to simpler questions. So your line of thinking is not wrong, but you're putting context and you're putting layers which are not necessary. Because, I'll tell you why. Fundamentally, if I break a person here and say, does this person belong to the state or not, you should have a cleaner minimum set of criteria that defines whether they are a member or not.

Essentially, a club, this is why you get an exam in a club, a club has very simple, clear rules: pay the money, give two letters of recommendation, that's it. And there's a certain number of rules. But fundamentally, your membership belongs to these two things.

Now here we are trying to do something similar for countries, for states, but it cannot be a simplistic thing of us economically participating because it leaves many people aside. It cannot be land ownership because it leaves many people aside. It can be somebody who is in a remote part of the country or a lower part of UTT, et cetera, et cetera, but I don't want to take that away from them. So there is a bit of a confusion in this thing.

Yeah, sorry, Harish, first come.

So who are the participants in a government institution or agency?

Who are the participants in a government institution or agency? Like military service. Or voting.

But you need to be a citizen to vote.

You need to vote to be a citizen.

You need to be a citizen to join the military.

Not necessarily. Actually, not necessarily. The French government has a rule, I don't know if you know that. But otherwise, you need to have some allegiance to the armed forces of the country before you can vote.

Okay, so as long as you're willing to fight for it, you can be a member.

Okay. Interesting.

Sorry, you first and then me.

You are dependent on the state's resources.

You are dependent on the state's resources. But sometimes I'm not. I'm a self-paid person. I don't care about the state. That's not true. Why? Because you're... What? Yeah, but I'm giving my money. I'm paying my taxes. That's my money. I pay for that person. I pay for that vote. You're still going to do something because you're so state-dependent. I'm a part of the state.

Like if you're a minor and you live in a country for, let's say, five years, so you cannot be a citizen. It doesn't matter because you don't have to do it. And when you become a major, you can choose your citizenship. So you chose that I don't want to be a citizen. Because then you prove. Some other country will be like, "Oh, get out." You cannot define whether it's good for you or not. But that's a terrible place to be, no? Wanting to... Huh? Like what? I don't mind. I get tired of the state.

You don't get to say... Like, if you're a citizen, it's not just a simple thing. I'm not going to be a citizen anymore. You can't do that. You're still a citizen. My past land, I can do it. My past land? I don't think it has anything to do with that. I just think as much as there should be a choice, you can't just like, you walk citizen as a choice. You can't do that. But you can. Really? I mean, you know you can be a citizen. And there's a set of criteria for being a citizen which you can take on as a citizen.

Remember, by the way, we have not even gone into the messy world of what is known as dual citizenship. It's... this country can't love a dude in this world who can't. Not Indian, but Pakistan. But, yeah, it's not... there are not easy questions to answer. But we'll try and answer them in the next class. Okay? Okay, have a good...
