I think it's a good idea. Okay, not really like, you know, all the more you can. I feel like if that was actually—if we have red outside or red motor, question if we did some other things. So that's something I will address because I think I is a bit more Springford also. So let me retreat.

I'll wait for everybody else to Remote Laser X or Lazy. Where do you get that from here for that function? And the last step is to bring what is the administration of the power, image power has to be solid. Input files can be very interesting. Basically, once you're sad.

Okay, is there anything back? Okay. So we will be able to talk about, just before that, the questions that you asked earlier, and then we have a little time.

So generally, in the grading scheme of things, and I hope the work he is able to use will be available with you, I'm not saying I won't get into the detail. But in any given classroom or in any given evaluation, there is an average baseline. And that average baseline is either set by the person asking the question, or the baseline is set by all of you in your responses.

So generally, if there is something about answering all these questions precisely to the point, that is not necessarily something that all of us do because there are three questions. Sometimes two will degrade, two will not degrade, right? But there is an average expectation of what the baseline is.

Now, somebody who does use a specific term from Anurgumara is not a slightly higher. Somebody who uses an example or an instance from something even outside is automatically higher. Somebody who uses more than one system in a state is automatically higher in comparison to anybody else. These are not relative ones. It is making up.

Which means that, as I have said in all my previous classes and even in this semester, there is a minimum expectation that you, if nothing, have read one particular textbook. So having read one particular textbook lands you here. Having two textbooks and replicating and making sure that all the questions are answered correctly, reflecting the classroom and the reflective classroom, gets you here.

But going above and beyond that clearly shows that you have demonstrated and initiated, that you have read more, that you have gone outside the scope of the textbook in the class, which is why I always explicitly say, please give examples. If you're using in-class examples, if you use examples that I have used or your classmates have used, then you are here. But if you have used examples of really applying it to a completely new context, it shows that you have managed to apply that idea or that concept to a new situation, which shows your analytic capability. The facilities, which gets you a higher grade, right?

So going above and beyond is great, but that does not mean that you learn German in order to read part in German, right? Because that is not the scope of the class. The exercise you will degree. If you are, as an individual, as a person, deeply interested in reading other things or reading beyond the scope of the quote-unquote syllabus, then you certainly should.

The only thing is there is a limit to which this can be crossed, which is why my questions are restrictive, that nobody is given an arbitrary upper. The upper scale also has a limit, beyond which, if you are doing it, you are just doing it because you enjoy doing it, not because it necessarily contributes to the course outcomes and course agreements.

In your first year, there are people who may have already learned how to do quite a bit of coding, as opposed to somebody who's never done coding as well, right? But the baseline is that there is a specific threshold of learning that everybody should have when they graduate out of their class. And that's what we try to do.

It is limited. There are times when we feel frustrated as a result of it. There are times when it may be far below our learning capacities. Sometimes it may be a little above our learning capacities. But there is an imagined threshold that we try to achieve in all our classes.

This is something that not only is my job, but there is an academic office, there is a committee, there is a course review team which accurately measures what this threshold is. And so, if there are courses where people are continuously getting below the threshold, that is a problem also.

If there is a class where everybody is getting super high in that outdoors—and there are things where, you know, there is an evaluation wealth curve that is typically expected. In most file designation nowadays, it is that 5% of students get grade marks, 5% of students get not-so-grade marks, but generally there is a medium distribution of everybody who is the threshold.

I mean, this is terrible because it's like, oh, it means that somebody is average and somebody is above average, which is all bullshit. I don't mean those things.

But statistically and normatively, there is something to the threshold: there is an expectation that a minimum effort is required to have a minimum learning understanding. Now, e.g., if Aakanksha is teaching molecular science, we both have slight variations in the threshold, but the threshold is there for both of us, and it is not dramatically. So that's something, if that addresses your question.

And also, last time we were talking about certain ways of specifically looking at power, and that's when Chidalgai said that there is an idea of sovereign power. Your question, yeah, so just to highlight that when I say that there are ways of looking at power—as agenda-setting, power as taking actions, power as influencing behaviour, and so on and so forth—these are not absolutes.

So when we say sovereign power, within certain structures you will have sovereign power. So, e.g., in a very, very theoretically legal sense, in India sovereign power lies in the rich people. The rich people, okay, that's a very realist view that the rich people have all the power in the world, okay. But that's not a legal view.

Say, the Supreme Court has the power to interpret, but it doesn't have sovereign power. So it can interpret legal power, but it doesn't have the topmost legal power. One is state, second is constitution.

What do you mean by interpret? Interpret who? So, e.g., if a policeman gives you data, then is that practice of power through? That's something the courts interpret. And the highest court is the Supreme Court. So, any practice of power, the Supreme Court is supposed to have court and say that this is the third power.

So, yes, the generic answer is the state, which is the state has an all-encompassing thing, which has absolute sovereign power over its citizens. But more precisely, one would say that the constitution, because anybody who has any power is given by the constitution. So even though the president is a representative of the state, and therefore the president is one way of looking at sovereign power in India, the power of the president itself comes from the constitution, and therefore the constitution is the sovereign power.

Right, do you get this? Okay. So, however, having said that, a non-legal view would tell us, like a Marxist interpretation of power would tell us that, yes, rich people are the most powerful. An international relations view of power will tell us that it does not have sovereign power; the US has sovereign power. Others will say the US used to have sovereign power until the 1990s, but since then, that power has come down. But there are many other poles of power; there are many other positions of power.

Yeah. So, from a legal sense, when you say supreme power, that is because people aren't following the supreme rule. So is it not for people who have the power?

Yes and no. Because one is the constitution gives the power to the people, but the people validate the power of the constitution, which means that if a citizen or if a person is going to practice their power, they can only do it persuasively.

So, if you want to get rid of a political party, you vote. You don't go and shoot them dead, because the constitution says you can vote somebody out of the constitution, and it says you cannot kill somebody out, right? So even there, it is demarcated by the constitution.

If you are talking about constitution, I should talk about even the constitution explicitly imagines that power over it is with the people. I think it will say that the people straight by. So that is against Marx. It's a good way; it's a cyclical thing that the people have created a constitution, the constitution gives power to the people. But also remember that we are born into a constitution.

At some point in time, there would have been—so, for instance, the constitution says you can change the constitution, but it prescribes the way you can change the constitution. So if the people who are really, really unhappy with the constitution want to change the constitution, they would ask their representatives to introduce an amendment, and the amendment has to follow a constitutional procedure to change.

Alternatively, if it is that point in time where the people say, “Enough of this constitution, we want to throw it out of the window and organize a revolution,” is then when you have total sovereign people's power, which very rarely happens. But once that happens and the people create a new constitution, the constitution automatically becomes a sovereign authority until the next time there is something told again.

However, the relationship between people and its constitution is something that takes us into the domain of obligation. And I'll talk about that a bit. I'm screwing you outside to give a profile.

Oh, sorry, but one of my friends is sick, and he needed water, so I was like, okay, fine. And this is perhaps one way of understanding the idea of the Weber constitution: does the constitution give power to the people, or do people give power to the constitution? But it is not only obligation; there is something specifically that the public and authority as well, and we need to address these in order to see if it resolves our question or not.

So from this moment on, I want to be able to take a slight step backward, because we have all used these terms colloquially, right, in everyday uses. We have angrily got at somebody, saying, “Who gave you the authority to tell me what to do?” We have a general understanding of what it is to oblige another person, or that you have an obligation to your elders, or a duty to your elders, et cetera.

Legitimacy, we do not use that much in our everyday conversation. But we do say things like, “This is not following the rules of the college,” or, “You are not following the rules of society.” So we have certain popular conceptions or popular ideas about what these terms mean. And I just want you to put them aside slightly, because we are going to look at them from a disciplinary point of view: there is a specific way in which the discipline understands these terms, both within the domain of theory as well as in the domain of empiricism, in the domain of practice.

Okay. Abdullah, do you want to tell us what was several areas about authority? You said that we use these terms for the legitimate, illegitimate term. Legitimacy, though, but we use the term legal. Your son is illegitimate, your son is illegitimate. Yeah, I mean, in the world of films, in the world of cinema, that is certainly a term used, but otherwise this is not a very commonly used term.

Okay. What also, what the reason in the last two-day classes, I’ve kept putting these on the board, and it’s also there as somebody has written: we define power as the authority tool. But that is a problem, because authority and power are two separate things. So whoever wrote that is going to get a small minus mark. But the notion is because authority, clutcher, either it’s okay, it’s fine, that they are distinct things, okay, and yes, they are being—they will be used to explain each other. They will have a very strong dependency upon each other. That means that if we have put power in our ballet, either, because all of these are deeply interconnected with the question of power, and they may really help us identify and understand whether, in what context, how is power practiced, and how is power fulfilled, and whether there is a sense of right or wrong about the practice of power.

So if I, because Dayanch is finding some kind of pleasure in his computer and smiling at it, if I decided to pick it up, I will have, at first, practiced power over Arch. But whether this is a rightful way of practicing power or not, and that is probably when I am sure I say that is an illegitimate thing to do, and he will have used legitimacy in a sentence, one would try to answer whether what I did was right or wrong.

Now, this is precisely what the domain of politics tries to address: whether what citizens are doing is right or wrong, what the state is doing is right or wrong, whether a policeman is doing something that is right or wrong, whether the parliament is passing a law that is right or wrong. These are the set of concepts that help us evaluate whether something is a rightful practice of power or not a correct practice of power. The way in which the government has practiced power, whether it is a democratic way of understanding power, whether it is—when we say that totalitarians or dictators tend to use power ruthlessly, these concepts allow us to really evaluate what that means. What does it mean to be a dictator versus a democracy?

When it comes to military relationships about power, because, as we know from Weber and as we know from Foucault, power is inherently within these structures: structures of government, structures of economy, structures of society, et cetera. And as a discipline which is interested in understanding what power is, this is what equips us to identify its types of power and practice in the power.

Be a good example, but there’s no authority there. No country has authority over another, but there is power alike. So, between two countries, there is authority. We will understand how that works in that. So, just hold up to that quite simple question.

And so, this is also where what I am going to do today is give you a framework of connecting the dots between the four, but we will do a bit of theory, but I will keep some of the more conceptual plan for the next class, where we can, on Friday, which we’ll do in the meeting.

So let’s start with some definitional ideas. Authority, okay, what do you mean by authority? Who is an authority? Someone who has the right to vote about the right.

Power is basically the ability to or capacity to influence people, and authority is the right thing. Okay, so you are rephrasing him. But there is something. So here, in one way, we are looking at the right to power, and that's your first connection. But it is either hold power or practice power; it can be whatever, okay. But it is the right to—you may hold power, you may not practice it, but you may practice power yourself. But what does it mean when you say the right to hold power? What is the right? How do we understand the right? Well, there are some, like, in the social structure, some bodies recognize that class.

The second time, I'll check having the right to exercise context. Okay, so you are using the vocabulary of recognition. So you are saying not only is it the right over to work, but it is the—so let me throw a bit of spatula into the words, okay. You got Bal Thackeray? Everybody's got Bal Thackeray? Yes? You want Bal Thackeray? Bal Thackeray. Yeah, I mean, Bal Thackeray is huge. We went to his house. When the CJP brought us, we went to one of the Thackerays' houses. One of the Thackerays. Bal Thackeray was the Shiv Sena chief. Everybody else is the children. Aditya Thackeray, he's the grandson of that Thackeray. A bit of a chunk of the Asian, but it's okay; he's become very strong now.

Bal Thackeray never stood for elections. He was never elected chief minister or prime minister, not even an MLA, not even MP. But when Bal Thackeray said that tomorrow nobody will drive anything, tomorrow is a strike, everybody followed through. People recognized Bal Thackeray had the power, but did Bal Thackeray have the authority to do so? Did he have the right to practise that power over citizens? I'm asking you upfront if you're not right now.

I feel like if, say, a body or the social structure recognizes this person or the body as a face, that would be likely to contribute to the right, and the right in some way. So does anybody have a response to that particularly?

No, the two things that are about—

No, no, hold on. I will hold on to that for a second. Instead of being on both sides, I want to make it very straight: he does not have the right. So you are saying Bal Thackeray does not have the right to practise power?

Yeah, in the case, he does not have the authority. I mean, right, if we go, it's like the fundamental rights. Everyone has a right to exercise power. But I would say he doesn't have a legal basis to exercise power, and that legal basis can be classified as authority. As one of the forms of authority, we can definitely say that legal authority—to have the legal basis to exercise power—is authority. But legal is a grey area, and that is why I do not want to—

So when we say, for example, you write and then you want to ask, where does this right come from? Either it can come from law, either a constitution gives some rights, or it can come from an act of Parliament saying, under Article so-and-so, Clause so-and-so, this person has the right to do so, right. But are those necessarily the only sources of the right to have power?

So let me give an alternate example, a much smaller example. Have any of your parents restricted your ability to go out of the house at a certain point of time?

Yes. Yes? Yes. Okay, I'm assuming yes. I mean, I would be surprised if your parents are like Tirba Cheja and Samshan Mukhya. It doesn't happen, right? So your parents have practised some kind of power over you in that particular context. Do they have the right to practise this power? Under which legal provision do they have the right to practise that power?

I mean, parents are supposed to be guardians until you are 18 years of age, but not in India. In India, can be had as a job as for what.

Either my answer wasn't about restricting authority to legal things, but definitely saying that if there is a legal power, it can be classified as authority. I wasn't restricting authority completely. But my question is, therefore, is legal the only—

Maybe some form of contractual idea. When I'm my parents' child, I'm entering into some form of a social contract.

Bro, I don't think your parents are just seeking your power.

No, I'm after you're born, for that matter.

Okay, so you are saying he did not have a political constitutional position, but he had the right to influence, or he had the ability to influence, certainly. But when he said “right to influence,” that's why I'm trying to understand where this right comes from. So one thing is certain: the right can be governed by a constitution, okay? But Bal Thackeray clearly did not have constitutional rights. You can say that the right of its constitutional aspect is one thing. It can say what an existence is: exercising these are an authority of the group of people.

The group of people assume that it is case, right, but to be able to do that, immediately accept that this person possesses the right. Okay, so I'll come to another dissatisfaction and these things. So there is, because not only you, Siddhanta also said it, that there is some sort of recognition of the power of the person, which can also indicate a right. It is difficult because typically we associate right with the constitution or with specific laws, but you seem to suggest that because some people or many people accept the power of somebody, they are automatically accepting the right of that person to practice power, and that's authority. Right? Perfect. Abdullah, you were saying?

Okay, so the fact that other people are influenced is automatically an indication of the right. It comes from when the people you are practicing over, they recognize—not recognize, they understand you practice power over them. So then you should have a starting and then the right to work there.

Yes, but that's precisely the point those who are making: the fact that somebody is recognizing the power of somebody over them automatically gives that person some sort of right.

So, we need to explore that further. So, just for people with confused looks on their faces, there are two or three threads we are drawing out. First, we are suggesting that the right to practice power can be constitutional, can be legal. You agree with this statement? Given the right to wax somebody else, somebody is given the right to issue a law almost on the other side. So that is one kind of right. I asked a contrary question by saying, but my country does not have any of those rights. But clearly seem to have the ability to practice power. Now, we are suggesting that this means by Hagre had some sort of authority. But where does this authority come from if it is not a constitutional right? So, are there other forms of right?

So the second answer that was given by the two of you is perhaps right comes from the fact that people are willing to accept this, or people are willing to follow this leader, right? That is the second kind of right that is bestowed upon that particular individual practice in modern times.

Okay, so far so good. Okay, so you can either give me a third reason to identify the right, or you can communicate the second answer.

I would want to communicate the second answer right now.

Okay, so just hold on for a second. Hold on. I won't pass. Okay, so let's take clarification questions first, and then we'll come to those.

So you said to practice, certainly. But why doesn't you have to assign a practice without? I have hour to run over here.

Because I'm holding the right in that case.

Okay. So, how many concede? He has illegible authority. I did ask you for qualification. Again, how many believe he has authority over panic? No. I don't think he has authority. He has power.

Again, we are going to text control with textbook answers. How many—it's a simple question—how many agree Chila has authority over him? How many agree Chila has power over him?

Okay. So there is something that lets us distinguish between somebody having power and somebody having authority. What that something is, we need to identify clearly.

Okay, so you had a question.

But we never got to the clarity, which was whether the party did what you would demand at once. If they carried him out, then he has power. Otherwise, even if guns are getting it. Otherwise, even if guns are.

No, he's making the argument that if Aryan doesn't follow the instructions on gunpoint, then he never had power at gunpoint.

Okay. I think we can add a few more traits to the idea of authority: that the other person, the person who's exercising the authority, doesn't have to justify their decisions, and they can influence people, they can persuade people without having to justify.

Wasn't that part of the definition for power, though, that we were—

Hold on. So, according to the second definition, if someone is influencing power, or you are accepting that they have power over you, that automatically means that you have a lot of power.

Okay, so you are saying that mere recognition of power automatically seems to translate to authority.

Okay. Like I said, I was doing—now I'm thinking that they say when someone else tells power, we say that they get to the objective in the presence of resistance. But if someone gives up the—like, they give someone the right or consent to make them do something, doesn't that remove the resistance part from us? Or is that?

Yeah, it's in spite of resistance. So, for example, we may say no to Chida. I mean, infiltrate—that is what they do. Of course, they point the lunar. Then, if that is not enough, then they pull the hammer back. Like, okay, okay, we'll follow, right?

So, you are saying there is initial resistance. It's not like Aryan definitely wants to do everything Chirab is forcing him to do at that point.

But initially they may resist, but at some point they may follow through with it. And so this is what your classical definition of, in spite of resistance: sure, there may be resistance, sure, there may be pushback, but as long as it is pushed, power has been filtered. Power has been practiced. That's the suggestion.

And to get clarity on this, what I wanted to ask is: can somebody—uh, yes, I have politically inferior answers for that.

But you can have authority without having power. I mean, a great example would be a very important thing. Back to the rich people thing: quite often, policemen who have the authority to prevent wrong do not prevent wrong in situations where there is somebody in a higher position of power.

Okay, then authority is no longer about recognition, but it also means that the person practising the power recognizes that, yes, this person has the authority to arrest me, but knows that they will be unable to because you have a higher power over that person.

Uh, you guys, I'm assuming you have still not seen The Wire, the television show—not The iHOP one.

I hopped on, I hopped on, yeah.

You started?

Yeah, I watched like a couple of seasons.

Okay. Like, in that, there is a guard. Somebody goes in to shoplift—like, somebody goes in to buy something, and that person shoplifts a Lolló, it's a cheap thing, and then turns to look at the guard and makes sure whatever. And the guard says, “Put it back,” but the person knows that the guard can do nothing to him. And that's a great display of authority and power in that particular context.

But to answer your question, certainly, there may be authorities that have the right to power with them, but they do not necessarily practice that right to power because there are external factors of power.

But let's say, if you take the panopticon for a funny example, there's no guard in the tower. Everybody is still intact. It's an intact structure. So there, who is holding the evidence?

The person who designed the panopticon.

The person who, or the authority that sanctioned everything, would not be called. Because remember, when Groucho was saying that power is there within structures, it doesn't matter if it is person A or person B. The supervisor of the panopticon may change, but the structure of the panopticon is a reflection of what created it in the first place.

If a politician—if a politician sitting in the tower as the guard—then ultimately, the authority is still in the hands of the guy who—

Um, yes, let us use a contemporary example: the command and control center. So, Hydra Major has this spiral-like building, which is the command and control center, where the police sit and watch on video cameras as people are doing things, and algorithms that monitor your walks outside campus and take a facial-recognition image of who you are hanging out with and how much time you're holding hands or not, and things like this.

And then, in that situation, occasionally, because politicians like to do these things, politicians visit the command and control center. But the politician doesn't care about whose hand you are holding. The policeman by himself doesn't care about whose hand you're holding.

But who is that system for? I mean, it's a system for what society as a whole believes in: certain ideas of morality and certain ideas of peace and tranquility, right?

So Foucault's argument would be that power is not really within the politician or within the policeman or within the command and control center, but it's actually patriarchal power, or it is control, or it's domination of political power that is not necessarily in one particular person or one particular object.

But it's that we have a sense that there are—if there are 5 million of us who hate the idea of surveillance, there are 50 million of us who believe that surveillance is good because it keeps things peaceful and harmonious. And so the power lies in that and not with us.

And then if we take an example of Palantir or something—

Example of?

Palantir. Surveillance tech in general.

So, I mean, they are not necessarily—

Yeah, precisely. The Marxist interpretation would be that it's actually a specific class of people that benefits from surveillance, because studies of flock cameras in the US show that the more high-value a neighborhood is, the fewer cameras there are. So, clearly, surveillance—

I mean, in India, when the smart cities were being developed, you should see where they put CCTVs. They always put them in poor neighborhoods, they always put them in Muslim neighborhoods, they always put them in the peripheries of the city. Because the idea is that crime happens in these places.

I'm sure the Marxist interpretation would be that it benefits the rich class. Another interpretation is that this is used to maintain social disharmony.

There is another interpretation which says that this is a good way of the opportunity. But it's not to the policeman, it's not to the politician. It's to what happens to the authority of, you know, the whole who delegates surveillance and its morality and its owner. That is an extremely deep question that has been really a point of debate both with AI and these large surveillance networks: who is authorizing this?

By the way, if you look at the CEOs of Finanteir and of Flock and all of these, all the houses are hidden on Google Earth and on Google Street View. You can't see them because they really are concerned about privacy and everything.

So this is the big question: sure, one may say that this benefits the capitalists, or this benefits the patriarchal society, et cetera, et cetera, but the deeper question is: how do they get the authority to implement these systems?

And this is—I’m not answering that right now because we’ll still have to connect the dots—but that’s one big part of the debate: the question of authority is not only about identifying who has the right to, but how do they obtain the authority to do something like mass surveillance or something like growth bombing of a population or something like that.

Sorry? Is that obtaining the necessary...? So I can make your point. Again, let’s say they have to get it out from there. Again, there is the question of authorization: who, if so, if that exists in the first place, or whether, again, at the end of the day, it’s a service which doesn’t require anything.

Okay, so the question I’m asking is not a specific question of who is authorizing, but I’m asking a larger question which goes back to our big debate: whether he is saying that, essentially, we are saying that somebody has obtained the right to install cameras, somebody has obtained the right to survey citizens, somebody has obtained the power to use algorithms to identify how people behave.

Now, all of this indicates that—we briefly used the term legal, illegal—that all of this is in the legal domain. But is it really a good use of power? And who authorized these people, which means who gave them the legal power to actually implement the capitalists?

So we need to understand that further, and I will answer it in a brief moment, but give the example of the shoplifting thing for authority. Sorry, give the example of the shoplifting thing about the exercising power in that.

But let’s say the power was exercised in Atlanta, but then after that the authority in itself will collapse because, let’s say, the user—if the power isn’t allowed to exercise power over during that time, and he’s not supposed to, and he hasn’t shoplifted yet. But then there’s some sort of trust factor there, which, as soon as it’s violated, because then the shopping has the authority to sue the police party.

I must admit I lost you from the moment you said he has power over him.

No, no, I understand what you are saying.

Okay. So let me just do a last credit—the dots—because that will help us go into conceptually looking at this a little more precisely.

Without realizing what many of you, and probably what was asking, not to use those terms on the board, the minute we say that somebody has the right to practice power, the question we are asking is whether the practice of power is a legitimate practice of power or not.

So, essentially, we are trying to select that person A. For example, for very simplistic reasons, let’s use cursor and group. Okay? So person A practices power over group. So far, so good.

Now, we are suggesting if person A has the right to practice power over the group, we are suggesting person A has the authority to do so.

Second, we are making the argument that person A may have the power to practice power over that particular group. But the question that we need to ask is whether this practice of power is legitimate or illegitimate. That is the second set of questions and connections that we are trying to make.

The reason we distinguish between the two is—assume person A does have a legal authority. So a policeman has certain legal authorities. But are all practices of policemen against a group of people necessarily legitimate?

So, the policeman has the power to practice law and order, correct? To maintain law and order. That is the fundamental authority of a policeman. Does that mean that in order to maintain law and order, anything that the policeman does is necessarily legitimate?

No. So, which brings us to a quadruped: there may be an authority, there may be an authority that has the legitimate use of power over another person or another group. However, not all authorities will practice power legitimately.

So, there is something that we can identify as a legitimate use of power and an illegitimate use of power, which connects to the question I was asking about the right to practice power. Essentially, somebody is making an argument that they need to practice power. Power is a legitimate right over my people.

So, Bhal Chhatra's argument was that I am a legitimate representative of Marathi people and therefore I have the right to practice power. Bhajare had no written authority, had no legal authority, but he seemed to have some sort of legitimacy because he claimed to have a right of being the leader of the Marathi people.

But what this required was people recognizing his power over them. Which means this recognition of somebody, whether it is of authority or whether it is of somebody having legitimacy over people, is an essential component. And this recognition is what leads to the question of obligation, because when somebody is practicing power over citizens or a group of citizens, what we need to ask is: Are we obligated to allow that power to be practiced over us?

So, if I say, “Get out of my class,” are you obligated to follow my instruction? If the government says, “Do this particular thing,” are you obligated to do so?

There are going to be two sets of arguments. On one side is that of a person named Henry David Thoreau. Henry David Thoreau said, “The government legally wants me to pay taxes. The government's claim over me is of a legal authority, but I refuse to pay taxes. I am not obligated to pay taxes to the government.”

On the other hand, Hobbes said that I created the government merely because I recognized that the government is someone who is powerful. So henceforth, whatever happens, I have to follow what the government tells me because, very simply, I believe in the power of the government.

So when Socrates was punished, he was found guilty of corrupting the minds of the youth and misguiding them. The night before his execution, he was supposed to be executed by drinking a cup of poison. All his students and followers went to Socrates and said, “We have a horse outside for you, we have a bag outside for you. You come, he will go off into the night.” Socrates said, “No, I am obliged to follow the law of the state because I believe it has made me wiser, and therefore I will drink this poison tomorrow.” They brought that poison the next day, and he drank it.

So, the question is—not the question, what we are trying to suggest is—the practice of power is a complicated relationship. You already know this from Foucault in the last couple of classes.

Now, what we are trying to do is we are trying to translate what happens when a police officer, a government, or an individual practices power over a group of citizens. Can we identify them as legitimate users of power? How can we identify who has the authority to practice power? We can identify in what conditions we are obligated to follow through with the power. In what conditions are we obligated to follow illegitimate power? In what cases are we obligated to not follow legitimate uses of authority?

So these are debates. These are crises which all of us have in our daily lives. Right from your hostel, you can't go out after a certain point of time. The policeman who has a problem with you holding hands. These are all very banal examples, but these are essentially problems of social structures and social relationships that can be understood through these four concepts.

So, just hold on to it because in the next class, what I will do, I shall specifically identify what are the conditions of obligation, how can we really identify authority, and where do we draw the line between legitimacy and illegitimacy? Because legitimacy is not only about legality, even though the words seem connected. There can be somebody who practices, who does something which is illegal but which can still be a legitimate use of power. And we will talk about that.

All the references to the rights and requirements for any country. So, India has power, and Britain also has power over India. Here, my question is: Does India have the right to do that, and do the British actually have the right to do so?

Gandhi was heavily influenced by Thoreau, very, very influenced by Thoreau, and that's exactly where noncooperation comes from. It comes from Thoreau's idea of not paying taxes to the state. It's also a landmark concern, it's a dissertation, and so forth. And you're rightfully identifying that the colonial power has a specific kind of power it practices over the citizens.

Gandhi comes and says, “Look, I'm presenting an alternative view of authority.” Now, if you look at Gandhi, Gandhi does not challenge the physical power of the British with physical power. Bhagat Singh does that. Gandhi says, “No, this is not the bigger target of power.” What Gandhi targets is the question of legitimacy.

What Gandhi says is that even though you have the queen behind you, who legally gives you the power to rule over us, is your authority really legitimate? That is Gandhi's question. America's original position. Do you even have the authority? Sorry? Exactly. Do you even have the authority in the first place that you claim for yourself? And which ties in very, very strongly, the question of legitimacy, the person of authority, and the question of is really the foundation of what we consider a democratic society.

Because a democratic society is one where you are not forced to organize. A democratic society is one where you can clearly identify a legitimate act versus an illegitimate. A democratic society as well where you can clearly locate an authority versus a misplaced authority who makes quite a bit. And so that is really the foundation of what we consider as the modern state.

But just remind. Of this example again, because once we categorize it, we'll use all of these examples, Balta Frei, Love Learns, the Policemen, and Gandhi and the British to try and understand this with conceptual training. Democratic societies are not forced from that. But there are certain ways that we are obliged to democratize. Yes?

So now, so that is something that precisely will answer that: what becomes a condition for a democratic society? Where you are obligated towards certain things and not obligated towards certain things. Within a democratic society, you should have the power for certain instances where you do not practice obligation.

So, Thoreau is a good example of this because Thoreau was not challenged. So he is not saying the government is illegitimate. He is not saying that the government is an authority. He is just saying, "I do not have an obligation to the government." So it is slightly more distinct. But we will come back to that next.

Okay, I will see you on Friday. Thank you so much.

What? Yo, how's my homie doing, bro? That's what the transcript, bro. What's up? It's not going in the nuts. Okay.
