That's B. Like, the split B. You heard B, letter B, split that. Funds.

Hello, good afternoon. We are back.

Okay, so fundamentally, one of the only things that one needs to study in an attempt to study political science is if you just look at the state, there's plenty to study there, okay? And what I'm going to do, based on the conversation we had last time, is try to do both parts of the story. Try to do both a bit of normative political science as well as a bit of empirical political science, okay? So we'll look at certain instances of ideas, but we're also going to look at forms and institutions and processes, okay? So we're going to do that balance because, A, we don't need to burden you with theory all the time, but it's... Yeah, so welcome. Was it in my limits?

So we're going to do both normative as well as authoritative. Some of it will carry forward in a minor way from what we studied the last time. So just very quickly, last semester, did we study social contract? In a very short way. I think we talked about how there is a social contract, like everyone is very excited. Got it.

Okay. So as I have indicated on Moodle, if you generally look at most of the textbooks, especially the Anupam K. Varma textbook, it covers most of what we're doing in class. For certain sessions, I'll give you an additional reading. So we'll read like... So those textbooks are more than enough for your assessments, but for certain sessions, like one on citizenship and things like this, I'll give you an additional essay to read, which will be helpful.

Okay. So the first thing is disambiguation. So last time we studied nations and nationalism, we used the term in a popular manner, the country, and we said that nations do not necessarily mean the country, do not necessarily mean a tangible object, but are something that are constructed through the institution. But the third concept which is always tied in with the idea of the nation, the idea of the country, is the idea of the state.

Think of it as a very, very formal way of approaching what we call a country. It's an academic approach to understanding what we mean when we say India does this, Pakistan does that, United States does this. The level of inquiry you're at is that of the state. So it's not the state of Rajasthan, the state of a nation, but it's a particular institution, it's a particular object that we need to understand.

And this object is by far the oldest conception of the oldest institution that various people have studied over the centuries. So right from Plato and Aristotle all the way back to the Greek philosopher, to the Roman philosophers, to by the time you come to the Renaissance and things like this, there's always people who have engaged with the idea of the state. Very simply because it is something that is all-permeating, right? It's all around us. It's inescapable.

It doesn't matter when you are born, unless you're born on the North Sentinel Island or you're born in the Amazon rainforest. But in these two instances, the state reaches everywhere. And in fact, the state has reached the North Sentinel Island because India, as a newly independent country, sent a group of anthropologists to go and visit the island.

And therefore, daily life is determined in multiple ways by the state, which tells you which circle to walk on, how to give your exams, whether you're allowed to train, whether you're allowed to get married, how to get married, what you can do, what you cannot do, what you can do in your own house, what you can do outside the house.

The state appears to be everywhere, telling you everything that you should do because you don't know why. But the state is this entity that is constantly surrounding us. If you want to build your own house, the state tells you, yes, you can build your own house, but you should follow these parameters. There are something called as the building construction laws in every state and every city and every region.

So while you are given an illusion of freedom and independence, the state is always there. The state, for some reason, decides that one particular scene in one section, Indians should not watch it, and therefore it should be cut out of the film because it will lead to bad morals.

So I'm only trying to drive home the point that the state is an inescapable entity. So once you establish that, we need to ask what is the state? We need to ask where it comes from and what forms does it take? And why is the state such a central thing?

So there has been a general agreement that states as we know it today, so India as we know it today, or European countries as we know it today, are broadly modern states, which is after the 1500s, after the 1600s, you have a bunch of what we today call the state. Before this, you would have kingdoms or you would have regimes, etc.

Therefore, they are calling it a modern institution as well. It's something that we have evolved, but it's very, very different from what it used to be in Roman times, what it used to be in Greek times, what it used to be in India's medieval period, etc. So there's an evolved idea of what we mean by the state.

So before we go into a very black-and-white definition of the state, there are two ways to look at the need for the state or the origin of the state, on why the state is a continuous presence in our lives. One part of this is what we call the social contract.

But before we do this, there is what is known typically as an idealist view of the state. So, as the name suggests, idealist imagines that the state has a certain ideal and therefore, by definition, is a normative concept. It's not an empirical concept. It's what someone suggests: this is the reason why the state exists.

"What is the word normative or empirical?"

Good question, I ask, for which you should have attended the last class. But very briefly, normative is not often studied outside; actually, it's what you must have studied. Norms equal values, so things you would consider as principles would be norms. Things you can tangibly study and categorize would be studied as empirical.

So I believe that the king, I believe that the state should be run by a king who is pious, who believes in God because God has granted him powers. I have this ideal imagination of who my king is, what my state is, etc. An empirical study will say things are hell, you know, things care about themselves, things are lavish, things don't care about citizens. Kings historically have ended up murdering each other, and therefore it's not the ideal way to do the reading.

So, normatively, or even, for example, if you normatively say, "I believe normatively in a democracy," the empiricist will ask you: Do you believe in democracy as a single-vote-for-a-person system, a single transferable vote, a council of elders, or a council of representatives? What form will you take? What is the more casual nature of that ideal?

So we are constantly doing this on both sides. Whatever we study, we have a normative example of it, a normative understanding of it, and our empirical, tangible understanding of it as well. This is something you should keep at the back of your mind.

So one of the good, concise, interesting views of the state is by this German fellow called Hegel. Did we do three moments last time?

No?

Okay. So Hegel says that individuals, when they are born, are born in a specific context. And the very first context where an individual truly recognizes themselves and becomes themselves is what is born.

What is the first context or the first setting where an individual becomes themselves?

The family.

So Hegel says that all individuals that are born into families have a sense that everybody in the family loves them. Not necessarily loves, but cares for them. This unit of some kind of mother-father, some kind of siblings, probably aunts and grandparents—there is some kind of cohesion in that unit. Of course, we have family members that we may dislike. But essentially, our first realization that apart from me and myself there are other people, my first recognition is that of my family.

Now, this recognition is because my family treats me in a certain way. The family treats the child in a particular way, which Hegel considers to be an altruistic way.

"What do we mean by altruism?"

Generosity.

"Generosity, yeah. What else?"

Putting others' needs before yours.

"Putting others' needs before yours, etc."

So doing good for somebody else in an altruistic feeling. So what Hegel says is that the family is one place where you recognize that there is particular altruism. The world seems to revolve around you. The grandmother is hell-bent on feeding you and massaging you. The mother is hell-bent on that. The father is caring for you. Your elder sibling is caring for you. And therefore, your realization here that there are people around me, there is a group around me, seems to come from this particularly altruistic position.

Because they all seem to have some kind of desire to keep me alive, keep me well-fed, keep me from being hungry, keep me healthy, so on and so forth. So for Hegel, this is the first moment of social existence.

The second, Hegel says, is as you grow older, as you step outside your family, what do you see around you?

Go take DC friends.

You see the world in general, the society.

What else?

Institutions, I guess.

Yeah, groups and institutions. You start recognizing that you are a part of something or the other. And this is the second moment, which he uses a specific term for, which is civil society.

Then you recognize that, look, all that particular altruism was okay in my family, but then I go outside and nobody gives a shit about me. Everybody has to fend for themselves. Because I go to a classroom where everybody is as spoiled as me. Everybody gets a dumpling from home.

I go outside; everybody seems to be following groups, everybody seems to be working, everybody seems to be doing things. There are institutions and organizations I become a part of. But there is nothing uniquely particular to me in these institutions, groups, and associations. But this is a major moment where I recognize myself, where I say that clearly things don't revolve around me and my family. There are other civil organizations, there are other civil societies, there is a larger world out there. But what I realize is that I, as an individual, have to negotiate with these groups and organizations and institutions. So this second recognition that I am not specific to, I am nothing special, nor am I the core of everything. But I recognize that as I grow older, I have to negotiate with a certain number of things. This individuality is what they refer to as egoism, to oversimplify. And what he calls is universal egoism. So when I realize my egoism, that I am an individual, but this egoism is situated within the universality of community. So that's my second moment of social existence, where I recognize myself as a part of a larger society, larger institutions.

And finally, the third stage is when I get older, when I turn 18. What are the things you need to do when you turn 18?

Passport renewal.

Sorry?

Passport renewal.

Yes, get a passport. What else do you have to do when you turn 18?

Driver's license, voting rights.

The voter ID card, and when I have to see the driver's license come to voting for you. But this is essentially for passport, you start signing on bank documents and government documents and things like this. And this is for the third moment of social existence, where you realize that clearly beyond the family and civil society, there is a larger presence which determines most of my actions that I need to follow. That when I was 12 and 13, I could have broken certain laws, but somebody in my particularly altruistic family saved me. I may have gotten into fights on the playground, but somebody in civil society intervened. But now that I'm a full-grown adult, I can't go about doing shit, hoping that my family and civil society takes care of it, because there is a large state above me. And this is what we refer to as universal altruism.

We studied a bit of Hegel last time, when we studied Marx. Did Hegel do one thing, the synthesis and the thesis?

Yeah, Hegel is the guy who makes the thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. Do you remember?

So look at the Hegelian report. The Hegelian takes the thesis from here, you take the antithesis from here, and you continue to do synthesis here. Okay, he's using two different ideas combined into one itself. And he's saying that the state is one, whereas the reason state is responsible for so many things, is because the state essentially is taking care of you. You are responsible as a citizen; the state is responsible for you as a citizen of the state.

So your third moment is when you recognize that, sure, you are a member of your family, and sure, you are a member of certain associations, but above everything else, your daily activity, your daily life, your personal, economic, social, and political choices are determined by the state. This is again an ideal situation for him, because Hegel therefore believed that the state is one which will take care of you, which will provide school for you, which will provide food for you, which will provide employment for you, not in those many words, but Hegel believed that the state is something that is essentially protecting you, essentially taking care of you.

And so, for Hegel, the idealist idea of the state is this universal altruism, that the state is one place which takes care of everyone who is within that particular state. So Hegel, why this is an idealistic or a non-native idea, because it's not necessarily premised upon a specific study of states, but Hegel is saying that this is where all individuals recognize their own positions within the family, within the society, and within the state. And this is the most overarching one because all of these are subsumed within the state. Familial relations are determined by the state, civil society relations and processes are determined by the state, institutions are determined by the state, so on and so forth.

So for Hegel, the state becomes a space, the state becomes an institution which is all-encompassing, but which is responsible for all individuals within it. Similarly, all individuals recognize the expanse of the state, recognize the power of the state, recognize the authority of the state, recognize the rules of the state, so on and so forth.

Does family necessarily have to be people you are related to? Like that small unit? Or can, for example, you can have friends who are still in this family or something like that?

Or a triple-A family, yes.

No, but Hegel, it really means a family family.

So remember, Hegel is 90–600 years old, with the idea that family is a thing of it as a village family, not necessarily a unitary mother-father; it's a mid-family. Because I was thinking of it like, in modern times, there are a lot of people who just live alone. It's like, the family is just that, you know, if you be away distant from the rest of your family, even in that case, I'm assuming these things still apply.

Yeah, absolutely. So whether it is a giant family or a unitary family, the same thing would apply. It's not distinguishing on the form of the family or the distribution of the family. It's referring to it as a setting of where the individual is becoming themselves. So there's an entire, like, Australian philosophy; there's a lot of things about how do you become yourself. So there's things about what is a being, who is a being, how does a being become a human. So there's an entire domain of being and becoming, which is transformation into the final being that you end up being. But I'm not getting into that.

So this takes from that idea of hidden, because hidden is considered that you and I, as individuals, how do we become the individuals that we are? What do we start believing in as reason to live our life in a particular way? Why do we choose to follow religion in a certain way, or social practices in a certain way, or political practices in a certain way? So for hidden, that's the question.

So accordingly, this is a part of Hegelian understanding of becoming a person, because for Hegel it's interesting that these are institutions that make individuals. These are institutions that shape the way individuals think, shape the way the individuals behave, shape the way the individuals learn, so on and so forth. And Hegel strongly believes that the state is one which really encourages the individual to fully become themselves. There are many criticisms of this which we will come to, but Hegel is of that idea.

Okay, any questions about the Hegelian idealist understanding of what is the state and what are the individual relations?

Egoism is very simply recognizing individuality, that your individuality. So don't confuse it with ego as we know in psychology. Here the word egoism says that the individual recognizes their positionality with the universal. So here's the thing about it as the self with the universal.

Gotcha. I'll leave it at the attention for now. All done?

So what did we do about social contract? Last time, what do you guys remember? You said we are aware of this next time we all sign up to follow. And when we don't follow that, there aren't necessarily legal repercussions, but instead there are social repercussions.

Okay, so let's do social contract in a bit more detail. Yeah, there are some echoes there, but we need to dismantle it a little bit. The social contract tradition tries to give, or tries to theorize, why we live in a state. Hegel is telling us what is the importance of the state, why is the state necessary. The social contract theorists are interested in how does the state come into being. How around the world have we all agreed that we need to live in this political system? So that is why is it necessary; here we are asking a how question.

There are three contractualists. So there is Hobbes, there is Locke, and there is Rousseau. So generally, these are considered as the three big contributors of the social contract tradition. And each of them have this sort of tiered way of explaining. They are giving three-tiered explanations, which is the state of nature. So there is no state. The other is the reasoning, and what is the contract. So each of these are going to tell us what was it before the state existed. Then you realize why this is a problem, and then you enter into a contract to create the state. Each three have a slightly different view of each of these.

So Hobbes is the most widely quoted. So before we start, are we basically asking which comes first, the society or the state, through this?

No, we are not asking that question. But these three have a different approach to that question, which we will understand with the example. So first, let's do all the states of nature, and then we will see this.

So Hobbes believes that—let me give two contractualists. You guys came into the idea for whatever reason, and you enter into a physical formal contract with institutions, saying, "I choose to follow the rules and regulations of this institution," which is you becoming a part of an educational institution as a part of your trajectory, your wanting to grow, wanting to expand.

But fundamentally, before this, when he says state of nature, we are asking him to imagine that there are no institutions, there are no governments, etc. And therefore, the state of nature is where individuals are present, families are present. So you may have certain early societies and things like this, but there is no state.

So when I say “state of nature,” it basically means there is no country, there is no government, it's a country. That's the primary thing.

So now, this is how we think of people. So I'm going to ask you a couple of questions. Generally, when you look at the world outside, we have had your fair share of meeting other people in the world. How many of you inherently believe—sorry—how many of you believe that humans are inherently selfish? Like, they only care about themselves?

Okay. How many believe that individuals may have partaken from time to time, but they are also cooperative?

Okay. I feel like both of those ideas are necessarily antagonistic. We can believe that humans can be selfish while at the same time being cooperative, right?

No. Right, like, I can cooperate with you to reduce the misuse that we are doing.

No, inherent selfishness does not reduce with benefit, because at some point of time, the mutual benefit business goes for a toss if there is a conflict. But looking for the mutual benefit is selfishness, right, at the end of the day.

Looking for the mutual benefit is selfishness, but till what point? At some point, mutual benefit ceases to exist.

Yeah, so you get selfish, you jump over to the next thing. So your fundamental nature is selfishness; it's not cooperation. Cooperation is merely a means to selfishness. So it doesn't matter. So fundamentally, you believe in selfishness.

But there is a group that believes that humans do try to look for solutions that are cooperative.

Yeah, one point is that you can have both. The fact is, you are selfish, you care about yourself, and for you, society is an important part of your life.

Do you remember means and ends? We did it a couple of times last time. Means and the final goal. So what is the final goal of cooperation? Is it mutual benefit, or is it self-benefit?

To be self.

Yeah, exactly. So fundamentally, there is one group of people who believe that self-benefit is the same; there is another group that believes that mutual benefit is good. But at some point of time, when mutual benefit comes to a conflict, the self-benefit guys are saying, “No, no, no, then we will see who is actually cooperative,” because when it comes to fighting over the last piece of cake, it's very clear who is going to cooperate and who is not.

So these are certain ideas that you may have about other people. How many believe that all humans are inherently hardworking and productive and trying to make things and create things? Naturally, that humans are naturally like that.

Naturally, sure, but I feel like the system doesn't fit.

System, what will you do with the system? We are in a state of nature. You are in a society where there are no institutions, there are no systems, there is a couple of games, there is a couple of animals, you are there. We cannot have a partner. We have a stone in your hand and a stick in the other hand. That is the game.

Loopy boy.

Inherently productive. I mean, let's say that there is hardworking and production for survival, right? You may have that.

So fundamentally, Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau all have different views of humanity itself. Hobbes is of the opinion that, in a state of nature—and this is the favorite phrase—life is nasty, life is brutish, and life is short.

Because all humans are concerned about the whole well-being. So when you don't have an institution, you have an individual, you may have a family, but you have limited resources. Come summer, there is no water; come winter, there are no animals. You need to feed yourself, you need to feed your family. And if you find that Shalya is going home with four coconuts and you have zero coconuts, there is a very good chance that you will pick up a rock and smash Shalya's head and say, “This is coconuts.” There is no cooperative mutual benefit to the other.

So that's the Hobbesian perspective. Hobbes says that humans are essentially naturally required to take care of themselves. So he's not talking about selfish per se. He's saying that humans want to take care of themselves. They realize that feeding yourself, keeping yourself alive, is a part of humanity. You want to take care of your family. And therefore, in a society which is like this, where everybody has their self-preservation as a topmost priority, life is solitary, life is nasty, life is brutish, life is short.

Why? Because you are concerned with these kind of things. So that's the Hobbesian state of nature: solitary, nasty, brutish, short.

Locke, on the other hand, is not that pessimistic. Locke believes humans are productive. Humans don't inherently necessarily think of stealing from each other and beating each other up. But because of their ability to produce and create and work hard, etc., they start gathering resources, they start creating families, they start making a house, putting a fence, etc. So generally for Locke, the state of nature is a peaceful one.

But the state of nature is one where the individual and the family are at the centre. So he thinks that humans are social animals. You create a family, you settle down in one place, and therefore you have a peaceful existence. Rousseau uses an interesting phrase. He says humans are noble savages. Then he says that we are fully capable of practicing violence like Hobbes imagines. But we are not animals. And so there is a certain sense of what is good and what is bad that we recognize, and we draw those lines. But there is something that happens, and I'll come to that in a second.

So Hobbes is fairly dystopian-sounding. Locke, you've got peace, productivity, family, happiness, etc. Rousseau is also like human beings are essentially animals, but they are noble, they have some thought, they have reason, rationality, etc. So far so good? Any questions? So step back as the noble savages we point out, and then we'll debate with the media. We'll debate with who? Media Americans. Yeah, you're quoting from...

Yeah. So there is a shift in the way that Rousseau has been perceived, especially after... And remember that all three are writing during the early days of colonization, not only the early days, but actually even the peak of colonization. And as Gruber and... What's the relationship? Anand. The author is Gruber and... Gruber. Gruber argues that Rousseau in particular, Locke and Gruber, Rousseau in particular takes a lot of ideas about society from Native Americans and other cultures that are witnessed.

But right now, for the structure, I'm not going to complicate that a little bit. So we are just going to do the grid to get an idea of how this is done. So in the Hobbesian state of nature, people realize that, okay, all this is fine, but we can't continue living like this. So every day I go to get coconuts, I can't be worried about somebody coming and smashing my head, right? So there is a realization that the state of nature is not necessarily... That the state of nature is not how we should live. And we need... We realize that this life is not a good life. Right? It's this time, this voluntary mass community shot.

So the reasoning is your realization about this, and the reasoning is this realization that you can't always be looking over your shoulder. You need to have some sort of protection. So you realize the need to have protection of the individual and family.

For Locke, Locke says, look, life is peaceful, but what happens here? What happens here? Somebody makes it a living. So this is simplified, but Locke is saying that now I have made my family and I have made my property and I have made my wealth, I need to preserve and protect. So here it is realizing that this is not a good way to live. Here it is realizing I have made a life for myself, now I need to preserve and protect it.

In Rousseau, Rousseau is slightly different. So this one answers your question about society or state first. Rousseau says that as we develop and as we grow, we start creating some institutions. So we create the institution of the family, but we create markets, but we create schools, but we create some sort of groups that are living next to each other in themselves. And he realizes that this collective group is not able to... This group needs to decide in terms of what? Needs to decide how to maintain itself, needs to decide how to protect itself.

But more notably, Rousseau also recognizes that while Locke considers that life is peaceful because I have a family and I have a property and things like this, Rousseau says that our savage instincts get awakened because I start seeing that he has more money than me, she has a better property than me, etc. So there is jealousy, there is envy, so on and so forth.

Now Rousseau says that this of course results into some sort of clashes, this may result into turning back into savagery, but if in the state of nature individuals have learned how to live together as a family or in small institutions, then surely we as individuals can come together to create a larger institution and a larger society. So here is social inequalities, social envy, jealousy, etc. Conflict will arise, and therefore again like this there is a need for protection, but his logic of protection is a little different than Locke's logic of protection.

So to quickly summarize, life is terrible, so you realize that you need to have a better life. Life is amazing, but you realize you need to protect. Life is good but slowly gets worse off; there are inequalities and jealousy, etc., and therefore you need to protect.

There is a thing from Rousseau that man is free but everywhere is in chains, that individuals are born free into society but sooner or later they get bound to social inequalities, they get bound to something or the other, so they are bound by some structures. Now the final state is the state of the state, and we will take a small break after that.

So Hobbes says that we are in a situation where everybody is terrible, we need to create something that can control everyone, that can make sure that everybody follows certain universal laws, certain universal logic, certain universal rules. And so Hobbes believes that we have to create a Leviathan. A Leviathan is a giant, huge monster. Hobbes doesn't mean it is a monster but the meaning Leviathan has come to become that monster. Did we have this entire conversation about Leviathan and Juggernaut in this class? No? Okay so there are two words in the English language which talk about huge organisms or huge institutions or huge things that shape smaller things. So one of those is Leviathan, the other word is Juggernaut which comes from Juggernaut of Pule. But here what Hobbes means by Leviathan is individuals hand over their liberty to the state. So what you and I were losing here, as liberty to do whatever the hell we wanted, we hand it over completely to this large body and this large body henceforth will decide all the rules for us, will punish us, will decide who is right and who is wrong etc. The Hobbesian idea is you give all your liberty to the state so that the state helps you become free. It's a bit roundabout logic but Hobbes is saying that you recognize that the only way to be free is to have somebody who watches over you and who watches over your freedom and regulates your freedom. Why? Because individuals cannot be trusted. Individuals have some reason and rationality but they cannot be trusted for their own or other people's well-being and therefore we need an entity that can ensure this kind of control over everybody. So instead of being, sorry of being worried about somebody else coming and stealing his food, now he is happy because now he knows that the Leviathan is always watching, the state is always making sure that nobody is going to get away by punishing, by attacking. So sacrificing your liberty to create the Leviathan, create the state for Hobbes is a way of ensuring that we have brought about peace and harmony in society. That's the Hobbesian perspective. For Locke, it's very different. Locke says look, I don't want to give my liberty away. If you remember from Locke last time when we were studying liberty and liberalism, Locke believes that liberty is an inherently human characteristic. You can't remove it, you can't alienate liberty from an individual. It's morally, spiritually, completely wrong to separate liberty from a human. Any human that's born in the world is born with liberty. That's the Lockean position. Now keeping that in mind, Locke will not want the Leviathan. Locke does not want to give his freedom away to the state. But Locke wants preservation and protection of what is happening with private property, what is happening with the economy, etc. And so Locke comes up with a state which is merely an entity which is there to preserve and protect. It doesn't have any other rules. It doesn't have any other purpose. So the state in the Lockean context is what we call as a minimal state. Some others call it the night watchman state. What do we mean by night watchman? That the state doesn't intervene in your life. But if something goes wrong, the state will tell the secretary person. So generally, the other boy is chewing the rope, but rather than the other boy chewing the rope, something will catch them. That's the idea of the night watchman. So in contrast to the Hobbesian idea where everything is handed over and this entity starts making rules for everything, for Locke, no. Let's have something, let's have peace, everybody be happy. And the state only steps in when it's absolutely necessary to do so. So it has very few purposes. It will say, okay, everybody drive on the left side, everybody don't kill each other. That's all the state will say. Or every time you have a property, you register it with me, I will maintain that property. That's what Locke was saying. In the future, if something...

...and fight for it and say that I am not doing it. But otherwise the state does not have any purpose. Its pure purpose is to protect the liberty and well-being of individuals. This is in contrast to Rousseau. This is pretty much what colonialism was founded upon. I will put my markers here and say these fellow neighbours are mine. If anybody attacks me, the army will come and kill the native Americans. And it comes from a specific logic which is... Have you guys read Robinson Crusoe? So Robinson Crusoe is a perfect parallel of the Lockean colonizer state. In future we read Foucault which was the gentleman's thing about... Ah yeah, so you get the point that the Lockean state is something like... Robinson Crusoe who goes and says this is my land, my territory, my zone. Anybody else who comes is the enemy so I will protect myself no matter what.

In the third, in Rousseau's case, Rousseau also believes that humans are capable of reason and rationality which is why they entered into the civic association seal. And Rousseau neither believes in the Hobbesian idea that you can do everything completely nor does Rousseau believe in the minimal idea. But Rousseau believes in a state which is a representation of what these civil organizations and individuals want to do. So if the civil organization which is a bank was created to alleviate money, the state should be able to alleviate money. If a civil organization, a school was created for education, the state should have and could say in what is education. Why? Very simply because the individual gets represented in the civil organization, in the civil society and the individuals have to be represented in the state as well. So for Rousseau, the state is nothing but a representative state which is the contract is one, is we have to decide to live in this particular manner and the state represents us in what we want to live as. But Rousseau has a sub clause where he says that if over a period of time the state becomes something like the Leviathan where it no longer is concerned with the individuals in civil society but it's concerned only with itself and only by protecting itself then you have to come back to a new contract, you have to make a new contract where you have to ensure that what the people want gets represented in the contract again. In other words what Rousseau is arguing for is a revolution. He's saying you have to shift completely, saying that the older contract has failed, you need to have a newer contract where your needs, your necessities are represented. It doesn't always mean to reach the stage of revolution. For instance, sometimes the state can be reformed. You can introduce your interests to the state, you can introduce your ideas to the state and the state will implement it fully. But at the time when the state stops representing your ideas then you have a revolution and you redo the contract. So quick summary, three different perspectives which are trying to say why the state is important. The state is important because it is the largest rule making body that will ensure that everything goes perfectly, everything is organized well so that people are able to live freely. In the second instance, the state is created as a minimal entity only to protect the individual in case something goes wrong. In the third instance, the state is a necessary institution that represents the actual desires and will of the people. So here we have the particular will, so how individuals want to be, and here you have the general will, how we think all of us should be. So to go back to that question of you came in here and you signed a contract with a lesser degree to a bunch of those individuals. In a Roussonian framework, what would be is all of 20 of you got together and said let's start an educational institution and we think these are the rules, this is what the educational institution should do. Five years later you realize we know what, we are not actually able to do this, so can we change something in the institution to be able to do this. That is the Roussonian idea. That you had certain ideas, you combined those with other people's ideas and you created an entity. If that entity is no longer representing your ideas, then you do small modifications to come back. If the entity no longer represents your ideas, then you do a revolution and you create a new general will. So this particular will and general will I will talk about a little bit more but not immediately. But any quick questions on these models? And we say that in the will contract we are sacrificing some liberties. Sorry, in the will contract? We are sacrificing some liberties to get other liberties. Yeah, so it's not only sacrificing some liberties, you are literally sacrificing all your liberties for the state to tell you what your liberties are. So to give an example from a Hobbesian point of view, you are not... Actually, example. So the Indian Constitution fundamentally believes that all individuals are free. The preamble establishes that humans, all individuals, all humans have innate freedoms. But I am trying to give a contra example. In the Hobbesian state, you agree to grant, to give complete control over liberty into the state, so much so that the state says that, you know, for the next month, nobody can be outside the street after 6pm. And you say, okay, that's fine. Because the state has taken complete charge of your liberties. So two ways of looking at it. The first one you said is yes, you are giving away a part of your liberty. That stands true in the sense that the state is not always watching over you and always controlling you in certain ways. But you agree to abide by the rules of the institution and that's why you are a little bit unfree.

But critics of Hobbes suggest that it's not a simple thing about agreeing with the Leviathan that, to me as a fellow, I'm willing to consider that. People have said that it's literally handing over all rights to the state to decide which rights you will get back. So the Leviathan can remove your liberties whenever it feels like, whenever there is a reason. While in a liberal state, there are certain liberties that can never be removed. So in the Indian Constitution, the right to life is not something that can be randomly tampered by the Leviathan state. Does that make sense? What about the difference between Hobbes and Locke? Hobbes' reasoning is life is going to be terrible and therefore I need to ensure life is not terrible. In Locke, life is amazing but I need to protect it. I need to preserve it. So it's two different backgrounds for which you require protection. In the first instance, you want protection from your fellow human beings, so to speak. While for Locke, the motivation is really strongly located in property and then it's about, it's not, I mean it is about preserving your life but it's about preserving your property and that's more important. In the Hobbesian case, fundamentally life, like I need to ensure that I'm able to survive, I need to have a family, so on and so forth. For Locke, the meaning of protection arises because the world is evil. For whom? For Locke? No, for Locke the world is not evil, the world is peaceful. Then why do we protect our family? Because there will be people who will come and take it. As I said, it's a... No, because it's... I mean, in this class we have fought with each other, once or twice we have disagreements with each other. But does that mean everybody is fighting all the time? No. So for Locke, it's generally quite chill but once in a while there will be disagreement.

sider that. People have said that it's literally handing over all rights to the state to decide which rights you will get back. So the Leviathan can remove your liberties whenever it feels like, whenever there is a reason. While in a liberal state, there are certain liberties that can never be removed. So in the Indian Constitution, the right to life is not something that can be randomly tampered by the Leviathan state. Does that make sense? What about the difference between Hobbes and Locke? Hobbes' reasoning is life is going to be terrible and therefore I need to ensure life is not terrible. In Locke, life is amazing but I need to protect it. I need to preserve it. So it's two different backgrounds for which you require protection. In the first instance, you want protection from your fellow human beings, so to speak. While for Locke, the motivation is really strongly located in property and then it's about, it's not, I mean it is about preserving your life but it's about preserving your property and that's more important. In the Hobbesian case, fundamentally life, like I need to ensure that I'm able to survive, I need to have a family, so on and so forth. For Locke, the meaning of protection arises because the world is evil. For whom? For Locke? No, for Locke the world is not evil, the world is peaceful. Then why do we protect our family? Because there will be people who will come and take it. As I said, it's a... No, because it's... I mean, in this class we have fought with each other, once or twice we have disagreements with each other. But does that mean everybody is fighting all the time? No. So for Locke, it's generally quite chill but once in a while there will be disagreement.

I also say this because he's a upper class handsome. He knows that the natives will come and take land back, he knows the poor peasantry will come and ask for their rights and stuff like that. So for him it's about preserving wealth rather than preserving. That's what I meant by those things. So what if in Locke's state, some people are sitting down and ready to take it? This is the bare minimum for the poor. Same for the Rousseau's statement, some people are setting up the bare minimum for the students. How are they going to do this? In the Rousseauian state, the state has to represent the general will. Which means, if all of you have the general will, the classes should only be 15 minutes and not 1 hour 20 minutes. That is the general will that has to be represented. In the Lockean state, you say, oh there is an authority and the authority decides what are the timings of the state. You don't need to interfere with the timings. In the Leviathan state, there will be an entity which makes the rules and we can't fight with it no matter what. Because the state knows best on how to make the rules. But in this particular Rousseauian state which is the most democratic of the three, is this idea of the general will. That it's something that needs to regularly be updated. That all of us have certain desires or tendencies all over time. And those also need to be represented in the Leviathan or in the state.

In the Lockean state, a general will doesn't have any meaning. Because what you want to do is you want to preserve. So you will say don't drink and drive. Don't smoke it in public. In the Rousseauian state, you find the marijuana, you find a group of people want to come together and say that in this society we think people are smoking or marijuana is fine. We need to pass a law and the state needs to represent us. Which is basically what in the past 5-7 years is what many states in the US have chosen to decriminalize marijuana. In the Hobbesian state, you don't have that idea. Then the state makes the decision whether you will have quality, utility like that or not. So even in Lockean state, if the people decide they want to do this, the people are themselves the ones who make the state. In the Lockean state, we are not concerned with it. Remember in the Lockean state, preservation of life, liberty, property is the only thing that matters. If it says do not drink in public, because drinking in public leads to fights, then maybe we can do so. But in the Lockean state, you don't really want to do that. Because in the Lockean state, all you want to do is you want to protect. So you will say don't drink and drive. Nothing will do. That's the only thing. So by preservation, did he specifically say that it's preservation of wealth? Because if I look at the Indian state, they have the system of IAS, IPS and all. Regardless of people rotating in it, the system is preserved as we move along. Can we see that as preservation? Is that what he is pointing towards? Lock? That's a completely different thing on the whole. Two things. One is that this is again a normative idealistic thing. It won't easily apply to a context of this kind. But for Lock, he explicitly spells out life, liberty, property are the three things. And wealth is another phrase. But life, liberty, property is something he establishes as the fundamental cornerstone of the state. Would you agree with me that in society, there will be envied jealousy that will be created? How is the state going to protect against that? I assume envied jealousy will be coming from people altered by the presence of the monarchy. So it is not only envy and jealousy. So where does envy and jealousy come from? Rousseau recognizes that it comes from inequalities. So he said that in our society, there will be concentration of wealth, there will be people who will be extremely poor and this will result into envy and jealousy and anger and stuff like that. And therefore, your general will should recognize that inequalities will be part of living in a society. And therefore, the general will will say, okay, we want a society where nobody is poor. Where poor people are taken care of. Where nobody becomes extremely rich. These are examples. So your general will will reflect on precisely the reasons that lead to the envy and lead to the jealousy and lead to that. And the reason for that is inequality. And so how do you address it? You address it by making more schools, you address it by giving, so the general will becomes represented in other ways. That you want a society which is not unequal. So the state needs to take care of equality. Remember that Rousseau is writing on the brink of the French Revolution. And he's therefore looking precisely at what is happening around him. And Rousseau's reflection is saying that look, the people are tired of the monarchy because the monarchy no longer represents the general will of the people. This is precisely, I don't know if you know in France, there are periods of governments that are called the republics. So the first republic, the second republic, the third republic, that sort of stuff. So after the fall of the monarchy, you have the first republic after Napoleon. Sorry, not the first republic, the...
The Republic. The Republic, yeah. And this itself also fails. And so Rousseau says, look, here is the idea that the general will has not been represented in this. And so there is a re-revolution, of sorts, and a reshaping of the state that state needs. So for Rousseau then, recognizing the needs for these conflicts and making sure that the general will addresses those needs is important because the state is supposed to take care of those needs.
But then, so from Rousseau's point of view, what does he think about the power of the state then? Because general will will, let's say if the general will is, power is equally distributed. But then the moment the question of state and representation comes into place, it gets concentrated in some places which we term as the state, then this whole thing falls apart, right? Sorry, I lost my last point. Why does it fall apart? Let's say the general will is for everybody to share equal power or live in a society of equal power. The moment a group starts representing the general will, there itself the power has concentrated to form the state, right?

No, because you're assuming that a group starts making decisions on its own. Rousseau doesn't want that. Rousseau says, so that's the difference from the Leviathan state. In the Leviathan state, once you make a state, the state will make all decisions. In the Rousseauian state, the state has to constantly reflect on the general will of the people. So how does power distribution in the Rousseauian state work? You can, for instance, Rousseau argues for democratic participation. So whether there's elections or whether there's making your general will known to the state. So you form these articles, you form these pamphlets, so there are ways of communicating with the state. There are ways of communicating your general will to the state. And that's precisely his point, that the moment the state stops listening to the general will, is the end of the state, having states. Okay, so these are two ideal theories of the state. That one looks at why the state is necessary, this one looks at how a state comes into being. I will just quickly go over the end in five minutes. However, I'm a lot of a supporter. It's in the sense that these imaginations of humans as inherently selfish, inherently this, inherently that, are a bit narrow and helpful to create these models. There's certainly value that if you recognize that all states have parts of this process. All modern states ideally try to preserve and protect their citizens. All modern states have a set of laws that seek to represent the general will in a democracy. So there are variations of a theme. But the reason I'm saying this is because there's no

it's not that of a non-critical view of the state.
It imagines the state as benevolent.
That state is someone that cares about its citizens.
In all three models, the idea is what?
The state will protect your life, the state will protect your rights,
the state will represent your interest.
It's all about taking care of its subjects.
So modern criticisms have said that it's not as simplistic as it sounds.
So there are two big criticisms of the state.
One is the feminist critique, which is also known as the patriarchal critique of the state,
and the other is the Marxist critique of the state.
The feminist critique of the state essentially says that all states are modeled after
patriarchal institutions, masculine imaginations of institutions,
and end up prioritizing, preferring, maintaining the structures of the people that benefit
for a specific gender in a specific context.
We'll talk about more examples in the Marxist critique or the bourgeois critique of the state.
The state is essentially a representation of the lending class.
The state benefits mostly the lending class.
It may have welfare schemes or rights and protections,
but the long-term goal of the state is preserving class inequality.
Because when you have class inequality, only then will you have control over certain things.
These are both important, but we'll talk about them in the next class.
I actually want to ask a question.
So you mentioned that the feminist critique is that the institutions are masculine.
What would be feminine institutions?
Not in the interest of the conceptual idea of what would be an institution that would
support those feminist ideas.
So classically, the relationship between countries has historically been determined by
what have historically been determined by borders and properties.
This is my land, this is your land.
The feminist critique says that prioritizing diplomacy and communication is far more essential
to the relationship between states rather than militaries and warfare.
And basically, you look at any country's expenditure on its military and any country's expenditure
on its diplomatic apparatus.
It's completely lost.
Similarly, so that is an example of institutions of rather than processes.
But also look at most laws in two of the biggest democracies in India and the US.
If you see that there is a certain hostility towards women's rights,
there are certain inequalities that are maintained by the state.
The refusal to bring about change in gender equality, etc.
So we see that whether it is in the nature of...
So there is one branch of feminist critique which argues that the entire idea that states
need to be aggressive in order to protect themselves is an extremely patriarchal imagination.
Is the chore you saw in the street when somebody looks at your partner.
It's not the chore of go out and you'll get a room in the street.
It's that kind of behavior that states promote.
I'm not promoting, I'm merely building.
So there are feminist critiques which point and say that there are ways in which state
emotions have been manifested in different ways and should not be based purely on the
basis of territory and the resolution.
There's somebody by the name of Althusser.
Althusser was a French theorist after the Second World War.
And he said, you know, you look at the state and the state has two kinds of wings.

The first is the ideological state apparatus and the second is the repressive state apparatus.
So the ideological state apparatus is the government's school, for example.
Is the religious organization.
Because when you go to these organizations, these organizations tell you how you should
protect the country, how you should work for the country, etc.
It's always training you in ideology.
So an ideological state apparatus tells you that when you're eight years old, you have
to wear a tie collar, you have to go down, you have to sing the song, you have to participate
in the pledge, so on and so forth.
It's constantly promoting ideas about nationalism in India.
The repressive state apparatus is when that one fails, send the military, send the police,
find ways of repressing individuals into following what you want them to do.
So you have the ideological state apparatus which creates you how to be a good citizen and
how to be a good nationalist in your life.
And when that fails, you send the repressive state apparatus.
Now this can be implemented in various ways.
It can be used to study nationalism because in nationalism you can clearly see that there
is a certain kind of nationalism that is promoted by schools and religious bodies and other
organizations.
And there is a certain kind of nationalism that will be beaten if you go and follow the
post-modern.
But it's also a good way of understanding the Marxist critique or the Japanese critique of
the state.
The state is constantly telling you why capitalism is good, why the economy needs to be run in
certain ways, etc.
And if you protest, then the country will send policemen to Lakhikar, you know, when you
are protesting.
So these are criticisms of the state which don't take such a nice, benign view or that kind
of view.
But say that the state has a specific agenda or a specific group of people or a specific kind
of idea.
There are other critiques as well, but we will probably do them next time.
So now that very quickly, yeah.
So in today's session what we did was why the state, what is the role of the state, then
there's an outcome, etc.
Next class we will do a little bit more tangible.
How do you, what are the characteristics of the state, what are the features of the state.
So when I say India is a state, what are the things I can discern and say yes, indeed India
matches these characteristics that will match that of a state.
So we will do that and we will do that at simplification as an idea.
But any last questions about what we have done today?
Okay, I'll see you guys on.
So you mentioned that these feminist critique is that the institutions are masculine.
What would be feminine institution, not in the interest of the conceptual idea of what
would be an institution that would support those feminist ideas?
So classically entered the relationship between countries has historically been determined by
borders and properties, this is my land, this is your land.
The feminist critique says that prioritizing diplomacy and communication is far more essential
to relationship between states rather than militaries and borders.
And basically you look at any country's expenditure on its military and any country's expenditure
on its diplomatic efforts.
It's completely lost.
Similarly, so that is an example of institutions rather than processes.
But also look at most laws in two of the biggest democracies in India and the US.
If you see that there is a certain hostility towards women's rights, there are certain inequalities
that are maintained by the state, a refusal to bring about change in gender equality, etc.
So we see that whether it is in the nature of...
So there is one branch of feminist critique which argues that the entire idea that states
need to be aggressive in order to protect themselves is an extremely patriarchal imagination.
Is the chore you saw in the street when somebody looks at your partner.
It's not the chore of go out and you'll get a room in the street.
It's that kind of behavior that states promote.
I'm not promoting, I'm merely building.
So there are feminist critiques which point and say that there are ways in which state
emotions have been manifested in different ways and should not be based purely on the
basis of territory and the resolution.
There's somebody by the name of Althusser.
Althusser was a French theorist after the Second World War.
And he said, you know, you look at the state and the state has two kinds of wings.
The first is the ideological state apparatus and the second is the repressive state apparatus.
So the ideological state apparatus is the government's school, for example.
is the religious organization.
Because when you go to these organizations, these organizations tell you how you should
protect the country, how you should work for the country, etc.
It's always training you in ideology.
So an ideological state apparatus tells you that when you're eight years old, you have to

wear a tie collar, go down, you have to sing the song, you have to participate in the pledge,
so on and so forth.
It's constantly promoting ideas about nationalism in India.
The repressive state apparatus is when that one fails, send the military, send the police,
find ways of repressing individuals into following what you want them to do.
So you have the ideological state apparatus which creates you how to be a good citizen and how
to be a good nationalist in your life.
And when that fails, you send the repressive state apparatus.
Now this can be implemented in various ways.
It can be used to study nationalism because in nationalism you can clearly see that there
is a certain kind of nationalism that is promoted by schools and religious bodies and other
organizations.
And there is a certain kind of nationalism that will be beaten if you go and follow the post-modern.
But it's also a good way of understanding the Marxist critique or the Japanese critique of the
state.
The state is constantly telling you why capitalism is good, why the economy needs to be run in
certain ways, etc.
And if you protest, then the country will send policemen to Lakhikar, you know, when you
are protesting.
So these are criticisms of the state which don't take such a nice, benign view or that kind
of view.
But say that the state has a specific agenda or a specific group of people or a specific kind
of idea.
There are other critiques as well, but we will probably do them next time.
So now that very quickly, yeah.
So in today's session what we did was why the state, what is the role of the state, then
there's an outcome, etc.
Next class we will do a little bit more tangible.
How do you, what are the characteristics of the state, what are the features of the state.
So when I

There are four significant features which have a definitive quality of the state. So if I were to ask you in one of the exams, which is what are the four features of the state, you would use an analyzed thing to say this is feature one, feature two, feature three, feature four. However, I try to, and I'm given for this semester, we do that, is have an application component where you use that in a specific framework or specific example. So you want to, of course, I'm never asking you to define the four features of the state and give me four examples. But sure, I mean, but as I keep saying, this requires you to really read outside. And I don't mean like, yeah, sure, Wikipedia read as well, but there is a certain way in which, I'm not saying that everybody uses chat GPT, but there's a certain way in which chat GPT presents information, right? Here are four ways in which you categorize that. Now, it's emulated in how we have started working as well, that we try to present things in our certain way. So what I'm saying is the more diverse sources that you read, you will do your application, the application to the definitional thing will be better. That's one part of it. The other part of it is there are generally what we consider as four levels in evaluations, and I normally stop at that level, either the second or third level, because the fourth level is a complex level. It's an analytical level where you need to, where it means something like taking India's economic policy from 1980 to 1990, taking Brazil's economic policy from 1990 to 2000, and comparing instances in order to create a completely new argument. That is the fourth level, right, which you don't do until you will do a master's level in these things. So I don't maintain that, but sure, when it comes to examination, I will increase the weight for the analytical rather than the... Okay, fantastic. The classes assignments that we will have. Yeah, yeah, actually you will see your class assignments are not going to be about who said what, but they are going to be analytical in some ways. Also, so the midterm right now, I think is two questions, can we maybe increase the number of questions? I mean, sure. And also it needs to be two out of four, and it needs to be one, and I'm going to do cross capital questions, so they combine. Okay, so... Hi. Hi. Good to see you.
