Today we will complete the other three selected concepts. I will generally push questions and doubts a little bit in the second half of the class, just to make sure that we have some fundamental things ready in your mind.

Fundamentally, we understand authority as the right to practice power. We already used our understanding of authority and rights in the last class, and authority seems to imply that it's some sort of entitlement for somebody to use power. If one were to look at it slightly differently, we are also going to say authority is the legitimate use of power, right? It seems to suggest that somebody who is in a position of authority is practicing power because they have the legitimacy to practice power.

For instance, who can give me an example of translating this sentence? The idea is that authority is endowed with the right to practice power, but authority also implies that there is some sort of legitimacy in that particular practice of power.

Yeah, the things—the police was behind the village, and I was behind, and I lost it. We had the village for speaking to where the mountain. The policeman beheads the village king after due trial in the village square, and then the people, they are firing them because they think that they have divine right, and the police force has the right to the king, and they are punishing them on their own.

This particular practice of power, of beheading a criminal, is what we consider illegitimate because people consider that person the rightful carrier of power, the rightful practicer of power, and so on and so forth.

To use a similar, more contemporary example, lower courts are not supposed to award the death penalty; only higher courts can award the death penalty. But that also doesn't mean that sometimes somebody with the legitimate authority to practice executions is randomly keeping in mind the safe kind of decapitation, or whatever else you want to call it.

An uncle on the road does not have the authority to issue a fine to you for breaking a traffic rule, but a traffic receipt certainly has the authority, has the legitimate power, to issue this rule, right?

I'm merely pointing out that all of these are interconnected, but primarily, the most formal way of understanding the practice of power is through authority, which means there is someone who has a legal entitlement to practice power—someone who has the right to practice power—and whose actual practice of power is a legitimate use of power. It's not something that is arbitrary.

Now, there are various ways in which somebody gets the authority to practice power. There have been multiple ways of understanding this, but for us, everything boils down to Weber most of the time. Weber makes three kinds of distinctions of authority.

1. Traditional authority
2. Legal-rational authority
3. Charismatic authority

Weber seems to recognize that historically, certain different kinds of people have different authorities. Linguistically, Weber notices that throughout history, at different times, people have practiced authority in different civilizations and different contexts.

If we look at something while watching Baahubali, the son of the king is expected to be the traditional next carrier of power, of authority. This is generally what kingships and monarchies tend to have: a certain tradition that decides who is the next person to have the authority.

Whether it is the European monarchic tradition, the Indian multiple types of monarchies, or any other kind of old civilization, you notice that there is some kind of authority invested in certain traditional heads.

These traditional heads also translate beyond the political realm, for example, into religious realms. We have religious authority, right? We have math heads. We have leaders of specific religions who practice certain kinds of authority. Why? Because they are traditionally endowed with authority. They decide who is the next person to be of the religion. The religion decides who is the next person, who should be the leader, and so on and so forth.

This, by far, is historically one of the most dominant kinds of practices of authority, largely because most older systems, whether it is a social structure or a political structure, depend a lot on this idea of tradition as the source of power: that the king's eldest son...

Is the rightful source of power, or, to use a phrase that we used earlier, divine right: in the European tradition, the king is traditionally a representative of God and therefore is the authority that is endowed with that power.

But we will also identify that certain people may not necessarily derive their authority from some kind of traditional power, but because they have charisma. And this, of course, is a bit difficult to say: somebody has charisma and therefore they have authority. But we will justify this by saying that, historically, there are certain people who do not necessarily have power from traditional roots but somehow manage to make their way to the top, somehow manage to capture power at a specific place.

We have multiple examples of what are known as slave dynasties. I don't think you know slave dynasties, where somebody who was a slave or a lower-order worker in that particular kingdom slowly by slowly manages to become somebody with some kind of power—somebody who did not have any traditional source of power, but somehow rises to the top and becomes a leader. People say that, historically, you find these charismatic individuals who slowly gain power as they go on. And you will say that they do not gain power from tradition because they do not come from the rightful tradition of obtaining power. However, they do find means and methods and have some sort of pull over people to practice that authority.

Now, this is also something that we socially notice around us. So, forget politics for a second. Socially, we seem to imply that there are certain people that we would rather listen to because they are charismatic, who seem to imply, or it seems to appear, that they know a certain number of things.

So, this can be some sort of patriarchal holder, some particular patriarch—as in an older man—or some kind of patriarch, an older woman in the family, whom everybody goes up to because they believe that this older person has the knowledge, has some sort of insight. Not everybody becomes that insightful person, but has some kind of charisma, which makes you believe that, yes, they indeed are saying the right things that you need; you should follow that advice.

Are there any other examples of charismatic authority that you may think of? [He] is a great example to suggest that he obtains a lot of his power from charisma, and not from elections and not from rules. Okay, who else? Because this voting into chancellorship is a fraught content. Yeah, you can easily face a referral speaking credit as a joint game, at least in the marketing. After that, you have—but somebody will say that this kind of play, the ability to do this thing, is also charisma in itself: that you are able to navigate.

I mean, for all that we dislike Donald Trump, Donald Trump does have a charisma over a certain number of people in his country who believe that, yes, indeed, this is going to save us. Charisma is not necessarily about a glowing personality and skin and an aura around them or something. But it's about the fact that you can literally seek to get away with everything because people are willing to forgive you for it.

Now, this helps us understand this a little bit better, because what it seems to suggest is that charismatic leaders' followers legitimize their actions. The followers say that what this person has done is correct. One way or the other, I absolutely believe in this person. So, it's a two-way street where a person who probably may not be doing something that is legal, something that is traditional, something that is conventional, but the fact that a large number of people seem to acknowledge that this person does have power over us and we believe in it is charismatic authority. And so, anyone who's modifying laws, et cetera, can fall under this.

So, to answer your question again, that bit Weber addressed coming to power, but retaining power over a period of time is another great aspect as well, right? And the ability to steer, or to not have reactions to, decision-making is again, comes from a position of personal power and not necessarily from the legal position of the contract.

Weber, for us importantly, also identifies the legal-rational category. And just after doing this, I will come back to questions. Legal-rational is a major source of what we call authority. And the reason we are using this specific term, legal-rational, is to suggest that one is charisma and traditional are not really rational. They are not really something that the rational mind or rational logic can tell you, that yes, indeed, this should be a personal authority. So, that's one part of the puzzle.

The other part of the puzzle is that we arrive at legal rules about who should head up a particular structure, a particular institution, a particular policy. And these legal rules are also rational by themselves.

So remember this phrase: checks and balances. In any political system, there are checks and balances. If there is something that is declared by a lower court, it has to be confirmed by a higher court. If there is one kind of executive that passes a law, there is another kind of judiciary which determines whether that law is valid or not.

Now, these are rational things that we have developed over a period of time. Modern institutions have a set of legal rules that have arrived at through these rational processes. And this is perhaps, in terms of contemporary societies, what Weber is looking at. Weber is looking at a very, very modern period.

Weber is not recommending, but therefore is identifying, that the strongest way of having authority is the legal-rational method. And this legal-rational method, therefore, would be a democratic authority, though these are not necessarily democratic.

Can somebody explain why this is the case?

Sir, I think it should be democratic because it involves the inclusion of a large number of people.

Are you against this for saying charismatic? Let's say 70% of the people go for the guy who's charismatic, let's say Trump's case. The other 30% will not really have a say in anything. Or then we can say that 20% of people believe in predictions or that democratic result.

Yeah, I mean, one is, let's not confuse majoritarianism with democracy. There are two separate things. Second is, you may have a majority. So one thing that is often said about Nazi Germany and towards the end of Nazi Germany, the European Union and things like this: it's not like people didn't know what was happening. There was a substantially large majority of people who saw that people were being killed, who knew that people were being killed, who knew that people were being picked up, family members, etc., etc.

But to do that, is that really democratic? Is that really rational? The practice of that authority, is that really a rational practice of authority? Just because somebody took a blind eye to it, does that necessarily mean that those were legitimate things to do?

And this is what we call populism. Majoritarianism is confused with democracy, but there are two separate things.

Around the world, most leaders who enjoy popular support—first, there is difficulty in calculating this majority support. But that's, again, the second thing: the decisions that either of the two authorities make, the practices of power that either of the two authorities make, can not really have any justifications for.

Also, while decisions that legal-rational authorities make have to be justified according to rules and processes that are identified by democratic means, which is precisely why—and I did not use this term—legal-rational authorities are automatically constitutional authorities, or automatically authorities whose powers are recognized legally, but the limits of those powers are also recognized.

The traffic policeman indeed can give you a challan, but he cannot seize. The traffic policeman can indeed stop you from driving on a particular side of the road, but cannot confiscate your car, things like that. These are all legally defined parameters which are arrived at through rational democratic means.

Now, does this make sense, why one would consider the legal-rational democratic and the other would not very democratic? Or is there a contention about this?

Okay.

So, to drive home the point, therefore, any authority that practices rightful power derives their power from tradition, from charismatic personalities, or through a legal-rational method. A legal-rational method is almost automatically constitutional, is almost automatically arrived at, rather than an external thing or a psychological thing deciding the source of authority.

The second thing I want to emphasize is authority automatically seems to imply a legitimate use of power. However, this is confusing because—

Okay, again, sorry, let me rephrase that. First of all, do not confuse legitimacy with legality. Somebody can practice power that is legal, but it can still be illegitimate. Someone can practice power illegally, which can still be legitimate. And I'll give you examples of those when we come specifically to illegitimacy.

But fundamentally, this is how we identify sources of authority. There are two other—and I'll come to questions at the end of this—ways of breaking down authority in terms of the practice of power. So, we have, I think, come across these terms before as well. We have something known as de jure practice of power and de facto practice of power for authority.

Have you talked about these terms before?

Yeah. So what does de jure mean?

Now, there is by law, by jury. Yeah, jure, jury, juris, jurisprudence.

Then there is a specific law which sets it out. And de facto is all the fact. So this is actually the practice of power. So somebody who is practising their authority because the source of their authority comes from law is doing so as a de jure practice of authority. While somebody who may not have the authority legally but still manages to have some sort of command, have some sort of position of power, is a de facto practitioner of authority.

Now, therefore, one will clearly see that the de jure practice of authority would lie in the legal-rational model, when de facto often goes into traditional models and charismatic practices of authority.

To go back to that example we were talking about Baljabha. So I began with that very simply because Baljabre had any legal-rational source of power. So one would argue that Baden Dharma never had de jure control over, had never any de jure authority. But very simply, the fact that he had some kind of charismatic persona, which was of course based upon hatred, he significantly managed to practice power over a specific region of the country, and therefore one would fall under de facto practitioner of authority rather than a de jure practitioner per se.

Okay, questions about authority or confusion, such like traditions?

You have a question. Before I was saying that we would, but we did it anyway. If you could broadly term traditional as one or three, legal-rational, liberal democracy, then calculated?

Not as simple as that. Very simply, because one is that, I mean, this is something I want to remind you: that the domain of politics is not restricted to countries. It can be about a lot of things as well. Societies have their own political system. So we should not be narrow in thinking that it's only about leadership and only about types of government.

So that's number one. Which is why I took the example of religious authority. So you have legal authority, you have epistemic authority, which means people who have the knowledge. You have religious authorities, you have social authorities, however you want to call it.

Typically, this is something that you will see in RWAs, resident welfare associations, which tend to practice a lot of authority over people that live in that region, right? So RWAs is another word for cooperative housing societies. So there is a secretary of the housing society, who will—and there is a treasurer, et cetera, et cetera. And sometimes these RWAs make arbitrary rules, like patchwork is not allowed, non-leather is not allowed, and things like this. But here are the kind of controls that RWA is practising.

Now, from a political science point of view, for us, it's an institution and a structure which has some sort of leadership. It seems to suggest that it has legal-rational leadership, that there are rules that it has created. But if you look at it, RWAs essentially can sometimes make irrational rules, right, which are not really legitimate rules, and we'll understand this when we come to legitimacy.

So an RWA can say that it is the rule that from henceforth bachelors are not allowed and non-legitimates are not allowed. Actually, under Indian law, housing societies cannot create such rules. These are discriminatory rules. But they do so anyway, which suggests that they have some sort of authority that they practice over residents in that particular region. And that example we'll come back to when we talk about the efficiency and limit of those.

So number one is not to configure automatically with countries. You have to look at other institutions, other structures of power. This is also really where somebody like Weber or somebody like Foucault becomes important, because they clearly point out that structures, social structures, economic structures, are also political structures. They are also places where decisions are made, right?

So one of the biggest sort of illegitimate uses of authority is when the Prime Minister comes on television and says demonetization is going to happen. If you look at the Indian Constitution, if you look at Indian laws, the Prime Minister has no legal authority to make decisions about fiscal processes. It is purely in the domain of the RBI, which is supposed to be of independent authority, so on and so forth. And if you constitutionally look at it, the Prime Minister has no business of interfering with that. It simply does not exist.

However, he managed to do so and get away with it because people legitimized this particular process. Now, then, that is what I intend to say: when we say that economy is also politics or society is also politics, the fact that today we have a large number of religious leaders across religions making all kinds of arbitrary statements about who should wear what, who should live where, who should behave in what way, who can marry whom.

They're clearly speaking from some traditional vantage point. The pushback against this traditional vantage point is some sort of legal-rational pushback. I mean, you can't decide my personal choices. You may be a leader of my religion, and I believe in your traditional authority as leader of my religion, but I do not necessarily subscribe to it. I do not necessarily legitimize it when I am going to practice my rules or my behavior. Does that make sense?

Okay. So you mentioned that we will subscribe to authority. So authority becomes opt-in or opt-out. Is that opt-in, right? You can choose to behave in authority. Is that still authority legal?

Yeah, you have three sources. So you obtain authority because you traditionally have authority, you obtain it because you obtain it deposited with Islam, or you obtain it because there is some sort of legal domain which gives it to you.

And authority has the core scope to be legislative. So where does that scope—how do you do it?

Okay. So that's a great question, because the legal rationale clearly demarcates and lays out the scope. The legal rationale says that the judiciary can do this but cannot do this; that the president can do this, cannot do this; that a district magistrate can do this but cannot do this.

The traditional seems to have no clear boundaries of the quality, neither the charismatic one, which is precisely also why we raised that point about democratic and non-democratic: because when we talk of accountability and transparency, which are two of the cornerstones of democratic practices, we find that a traditional leader has no real accountability to anyone. They can get away by saying anything, doing anything.

Similarly, charismatic leaders do not seem to be accountable to anyone. The fact that we can have tons of money being completely unaccounted for is merely the reason that we put our faith in someone who seems to enjoy that position. So we are perfectly trusting that that person is not being authoritarian.

But that's precisely why legal rationalism is a modern democratic source of authority, because it clearly lays out where the boundaries of that authority lie. Therefore, even in a university, there are specific rules and practices assigned to all members that a random person cannot come and confiscate.

In my college, it was a big thing. You guys have that problem? Confiscation of ID cards. Like, my calculator: “I'm Prester and College.” Anything was about, “Oh, your ID card will be confiscated. Oh, you're using your phone? Confiscated ID card. Oh, you bought something that is just touching your—confiscated ID card,” and then you have to pay fines and things like that.

And it could be arbitrary. We had one professor in the political science department who was completely downright rapidly dependent on whether she liked the person or not, that she would take ID cards, and you are going for me or something like this. And those are not really legal.

And so, within institutions as well, you have very specific things that people can do, because it is recognized that certain people have the authority to own this domain: this is the limit of that authority, this is the ability to practice it, this is not something they should do. The other group do not have any such restrictions.

Okay. Other clients, have any questions about authority?

Cool. Let's jump to legitimacy. So, first, as I said, let's not confuse legitimacy with DAC. Okay. So I'm going to come to this arbitrary circle, semicircle.

What the concept of legitimacy allows us to do is understand. Until now, when talking about power and talking about authority, we have been using the word “recognize,” right? That you recognize the power of somebody, you recognize their correctness in some way.

So legitimacy is a very specific form of recognition, and this is—if one were to define it—legitimacy is nothing but recognition of rightful exercise of power.

So, what do we mean by this? Very simply, the practice of power, as long as it is primed, is validated, recognized, considered correct by somebody somewhere. Therefore, it doesn't matter whether it is traditional, it doesn't matter whether it's charismatic, it doesn't matter whether it is democratic or not democratic. As long as—but what it does require is the practice of power to be legitimized: that someone somewhere has to stand up and say that, yes, this is what is done, has been done correctly.

Now, of course, the question is going to be: is it going to be 51%, is it going to be 71%, et cetera, et cetera? That's not the point. We are not right now interested in measuring legitimacy. What we are interested in is understanding when a practice of power is considered rightful. Who considers the practice of power as rightful?

Because, essentially, by doing so, you are automatically recognizing—you are automatically recognizing—that that individual person seems to have some kind of power which is a legitimate power.

Let's understand this a little bit more. Two ways of understanding legitimacy from a theoretical point of view are normative versus descriptive. The normative allows us to create the boundaries of authority or create the boundaries of power. The normative tells us whether it should be legitimate, while the descriptive tells us whether it has been accepted as legitimate.

So it goes back to the normative-empirical question that we have always been dealing with, that as a society we consider certain things should be like this or certain things should not be like this. A great normative idea that is generally believed in most modern democracies is you do not use lethal force on protesters. That is a normative position saying no democratic country should use lethal force on its citizens. And therefore, we have these Geneva Conventions and these other international conventions, which lay the normative ground saying, "Do not do this. This is not correct, this is not right, this is not the right kind of practice."

So, political prisoners: there is a normative idea that political prisoners should be treated differently than criminals, that they should be given more dignity than criminals. Now, these are things we wish every society has. However, we do know that there are societies in which protesters are harmed. There are societies in which political prisoners are treated the same as criminal prisoners, including our own.

However, what legitimacy here allows us to see is what we as a society believe in as legitimate and illegitimate, and what we legitimize and do not legitimize in actual practice.

So let's use two examples of torture that have happened in India. You guys have heard of—yeah, I mentioned the Bhagalpur blindings last semester or something like this. No, I didn't use Dharanpur. Of course I did, I think. I'm pretty sure I did.

Okay, so in Bihar, in this particular place called Bhagalpur, a group of petty criminals were caught by the police and put in the lockup. At night, one or two of the constables basically removed the battery from the jeep, poured acid into the eyes of the prisoners. And these were petty criminals; they were charged with theft and dacoity and all of this.

So, of course, I mean, I'm not saying that they are good people or anything like this. They did commit crimes. But what happened was this blinding, that three or four of them got blinded as a result, obviously, of acid being poured into their eyes.

Now, at that time, this was the late eighties, if I remember correctly, people went crazy. People and the press were saying that this is not how humans should be treated, this is not how prisoners should be treated, right? And therefore, a very clear normative idea existed that you do not treat anybody in this way. You do not treat even petty criminals in a way of blinding them by pouring acid.

And therefore, the descriptive seemed to match the normative, where it said that the police officials who were involved were pulled up. They were suspended, and the courts issued a declaration saying that this is not done. It issued a set of guidelines for all police personnel, et cetera, to define what are legitimate things police can do and cannot do.

So, in that particular instance, you have both a normative way of understanding legitimate police power, but you also have a descriptive way of looking at legitimate police power, because clearly these both seem to match in that particular context.

Now, the other example is that of—have you guys heard of Papa 1 and Papa 2?

Okay, what is Papa 1 and Papa 2?

Papa 2 was a place in Kashmir where paramilitary forces and Jammu and Kashmir police could pick up people, do exactly—I mean, not exactly—do far worse than what was done in Bhagalpur. They blinded people, they electrocuted people, they cut off body parts to torture people into giving information on whatever things may be.

If you want to, there is a fantastic book called Curfewed Night by Basharat Peer, which talks of this period of Kashmiri history.

Now, at that point of time, the normative idea stated that you should not be torturing. You should not be blinding people, you should not be cutting off people's hands and feet or inflicting them in any human case. But descriptively, if you look at it, a majority of people in India were like, "This is fine. These are all terrorists. You should do whatever you want with terrorists." This is the vocabulary that has come up every second time anything related to terrorism has been there.

So whether you look at the Dagistani movement, whether you look at the Kashmir movement, whether you look at the Naxal movement, or the various movements in the Northeast, at that point in time, he seems to have a different idea of what is a legitimate use of power. Both in the popular press, in the public, and even in the judiciary, people seem to argue that, no, no, this is all fine. This is all fine because it serves some kind of [purpose], and therefore, this is legitimate. This is okay to do. We will not punish those that are [involved].

Now, clearly, what the two examples—I am using the two examples to show you—is that there are certain things that may, normatively and descriptively, be on the same page, legitimizing practices of power. However, there are certain instances where they do not necessarily match.

And this is not only so. For example, the Americans came up with a wonderful way of doing this distinction. They say, “Okay, we won't torture people on American soil. So, we can take them anywhere else in the world and we can torture them as much as we want, but we will never do it on American soil.” So, it's okay. If they are in Florida, it's illegal, but if they are in Haiti, [it is not]. So that was their way of legitimizing what is allowed and what is not allowed.

Now, what we are trying to understand through this, when we look at normative versus descriptive ones, is that the descriptive one seems to be more context-specific. The descriptive one seems to be more easy to derive from other sources of authority, while the normative act is something that we, as a society, aspire to suggest: these are good practices of power, and these are bad practices of power.

A small micro example is school. Did any of you go to school when you guys were back? You went to school where you were back? You went to school when you guys were back. Anybody else? No, right? Very occasionally. Very occasionally.

In my school, it was like the teachers had a free hand. My relationship with Catholicism was a long way. This was the evangelists before the priest. The evangelists were the ones who treated you for anything, right? So my favourite memory is when I finished an exam half an hour early, and then, back to the question paper, I was drawing something, and my arm was whacked out of my body. I never thought of sketching again for the next six months.

But clearly, that idea has changed. Descriptively, we, as a society, have slowly gone towards that idea that corporal punishment in school should not be practised anymore, right? It was a normative idea that we have slowly tried to reach.

So now, there are only two people who got that, but in my time there was probably 50% of the class who was evaluated at some point in time. The descriptive also changes. The descriptive is contextual, the descriptive is political, and it allows us to see, in which society, what is legitimized and what is not legitimized.

When you look at the recent, sort of, last year's pickups in the United States of immigrants, people considered it an illegitimate use of power. So there were people writing editorials about it, people talking about it, etc., etc.

When the Delhi Police went around [students], people said, “No, this is not the correct thing to do,” etc. So there are instances where there is a very [clear] process of legitimization or legitimacy. There is no simple source of legitimacy. It can be a group of people, it can be popular media, it can be internationally recognized, or not recognized. But what is necessary to note is that someone, somewhere, has their own way of legitimizing the practice of power or legitimizing the practice of authority as well.

Legitimacy, therefore, also determines whether an authority is really an authority, or it is just an arbitrary person practising power. So if somebody comes along and declares, okay, khap panchayats in Haryana and fatwas issued by clerics say that women should not go out beyond a particular point in time. The source of authority is a traditional source of authority, but it depends on whether that community legitimizes that decision or not.

In both instances, there are people who legitimize the authority, the traditional authority. And there are people who do not. There are societies where certain traditional authorities cannot make these kinds of statements.

If you look at most of Western Europe, you will see that traditional authorities cannot make any such command over the personal life of people. In India, we still seem to have some kind of legitimization because people believe that this is the true source of power.

So, to understand this a little bit differently, legitimacy can be seen as consent—that is, a consent to the authority. Legitimacy can be seen as a recognition of political power, that a person may not be a leader like Balakrishna, may not be an elected leader, but there is a—I will, let me rephrase that—there is a political justification for it.

There is a third way: legitimizing the authority of somebody leads to benefits for their community. This is typically a utilitarian view. So people argued and said that, you know, torture is good because it prevents terror attacks from happening in the country. That's this kind of view that seems to leximize seeing Sadhguru. That is why some people should be sacrificed.

It is also suggested that, to understand legitimacy, there is a process of deliberation. It's not one person deciding on Monday morning that, yes, this is legitimate, but the fact that in modern societies all of us have consensus, all of us have conversation. All of us speak to each other, we share our opinions, and therefore we deliberate towards whether we consider this as a rightful practice of power or not.

Because there are a lot of blank faces, I'm going to try to quickly summarize this. Authority is something very, very specific. It says person X has the authority to practice power. Legitimacy is a way that we have of recognizing whether the practice of power is correct or not. The source of that can be a traditional authority, can be a legal authority, can be a community authority. Whatever the case may be, essentially, legitimacy is a way for us to recognize whether somebody's practice of power within an institution, within a structure, is rightful, is correct, or not.

There are certain normative ideas of what is legitimate and what is not legitimate. But descriptively, these ideas are not as static. They are in debate, they are in conversation. There is always a deliberation over what is a legitimate use of power or a legitimate practice of power.

How legitimacy can be seen is when people consent to power being practiced over them. It can be seen as a legitimate practice of power. When people have a political justification for the practice of power, that is again seen as an acceptance. When people argue that this practice of power has benefits for everybody, that is also a form of legitimation. And finally, this process of agreement should be a process of deliberation, should be a process of conversation, should not be something that is imposed upon you.

I will not give examples right now. Okay, questions?

Yes, audition.

Between political justification and deliberation.

Political justification and deliberation.

A political justification: declaring that demonetization is necessary to wipe out glatamy is a political justification. It is not given as an option to you. You have to follow through with it, and it has been justified politically.

Deliberation could mean having the foremost economists, having the RBI chairperson, having academics, having people from other agencies sitting together to decide, how do we really get rid of black money in this country? It is something that people would accept, would arrive at an acceptable solution, rather than something that is imposed upon them.

Very simply, something that is justified politically will have a lot of detractors, while something that has gone through a deliberative process will have an acceptance because there is some sort of consensus that is built towards it. So this can be seen as top-down, not always, but it can be seen as top-down. While this is seen as something that is again more engaged and more demonetic.

Yeah. So you mentioned the equation of rightful practice of power. So rightful is something that is inherently different in this case, or is it the normative work?

Rightful is what comes from there. There are people who suggest that they have the right to practice power because of tradition, because of law, because of charisma. That's the argument. This is merely recognizing either of those three, or recognizing any person who claims to have the authority to do so.

This is essentially what we often said about godmen, right? Babas. Babas come out of nowhere and they say, I have knowledge and I have something to give everybody. It depends upon people who want to acknowledge that or not. You want to recognize that Baba. For every Baba that we see on television, there are 20 Babas that are probably not accepted by the people, who are not as charismatic as Baba Rambay users on TV.

Illegitimate authority can also exist.

Then, since legitimacy is—

No. But just as a clarification, you cannot have illegitimate authority. You can have an authority that practices power illegitimately.

Okay. But since the definition of legitimacy is also not defined properly, then how is it different between a legitimate use of authority and an illegitimate use of authority?

Okay. First of all, it is defined properly. It's when you recognize the practice of power. It's vested in a certain sense.

So if the definition itself is subjective, then—

Right, the conditions for something being legitimate are subjective. How do we differentiate if a particular instance is legitimate or illegitimate?

How many consider that the war on Iraq was justified? Sure. How many consider the war in Afghanistan was justified? How many consider that demonetization was justified? So clearly there seems to be some sort of agreement over what is justified and what we have to justify.

Now, if, for example, Siddhant were to say that I agree with demonetization because it reached the goals of providing 3D chips and GPS chips and whatever else, he is providing a political justification. Now, as a community, as an institutional community, you have the ability to deliberate and decide whether Siddhant is correct or not. You can drown him out, or you can agree with him, et cetera.

Let's use a much more triple-A example to understand. There is this thing called TA payments. There's a debate about whether TAs are willing to it enough or not. Actually, that's bad. That was just a declaration.

No, I think I get the point, but how do you define the community deliberates or decides to certify the money?

Okay, so that's a better way of posing the question. There are different scales. So recently, this—what's his idea—the Maulana in Kerala? What is that child? Grand Mufti. Grand Mufti. The Grand Mufti made some idiotic comments in Kerala recently about women and women's freedom and things like this. And immediately, there was an approval.

If, at some point in time, somebody files a case in a regional court or a higher court or a Supreme Court, it may be determined that religious leaders are not allowed to issue rules about personal freedoms. This has happened before—not about freedom, not about this, but about other things. For example, religious leaders have often suggested that people within different communities should not marry.

This is something that, within a community—so within Zoroastrians, if women marry non-Zoroastrians, they are removed from Zoroastrianism. If men marry non-Zoroastrians, they are allowed to be Zoroastrian. Women therefore do not get property if they marry a non-Jew husband, but men get property. Somebody took it to court and said that this is against the principles of equality and provisions. It's a debate, but there has been some movement towards equalization. There are some courts that have upheld the right of women to equal property.

Now, in that particular instance, members of that community legitimize the decision of the religious head. But there is someone above that. So there is a scale above that, and for us it is the judiciary.

When it comes to something like Iraq and Afghanistan, at no point in time did George Bush ask any of you or your parents for legitimacy. He went ahead and did it anyway. But internationally, in the US, you may have support, you may have consensus, you may have legitimacy to do so, but internationally it was condemned. Internationally, people said this is a delegitimate practice of that.

So, certainly, it's not like person A or practice of power A, when found as illegitimate by a group of people, automatically kills that person as punishment. No. Typically, in traditional legal settings—in traditional, sorry, in legal-rational settings, in democratic settings—people overstepping their authorities can, their actions can be formally legitimate. Like the Maharpur landings case, where things that governments have done, things that policemen have done, things that armies have done, are considered as illegitimate. They are and therefore are addressed in some legal manner or the other.

I agree with you that there are certain instances where it lies in a very, very blurry boundary on who is actually deciding whether this is legitimate or non-legitimate. But for us, one way of understanding that is scales; the other is understanding the situation where it exists. So, if it is a religious community, perhaps it is the community itself that defines what itself, but whether it's a democratic setting, you are looking at a larger country, the Constitution, so on and so forth.

And again, to go back to that example, demonetization, or to go back to that example of Iraq and Afghanistan.

Authorities can get away with illegitimate uses of power. There are other ways that authorities can get away with it. Because of the inherent power that they have, they can get away with it. George Bush famously did not listen to the Congress. After demonetization, hundreds of people, hundreds of economists wrote that this is illegitimate. But they went through a day because, charismatically, the majority of the people said yes, and here we went through that. We agreed to do it.

It can be historical. There are things that—I don't know if you must have seen that Canada and Australia and New Zealand often issue apologies for historical pasts, where they have said that we are sorry that, a hundred years ago, we took the land away or killed people, et cetera.

So, at some point in time, temporarily, there is a regularization process or a deregularization process. Yeah. Other questions about legitimacy? Yes?

I still don't understand: the revocation comes from—is it the majority or provoking?

As I said, it's not a numerical thing. As I said, it is a deliberative field. In the context of Iraq, who recognizes it? I mean, is the New York Post a recognition of illegitimacy? Is the Times of India writing an editorial legitimizing illegitimacy? Legitimizing—that you cannot really ground it in object A and object B. It is about consensus; it is about deliberation. Like, 20 years later, somebody may realize that this was not a legitimate practice of power. At the moment, people may decide whether this is legitimate or illegitimate. It doesn't matter.

What it allows us to see, like I said, is that this is not something that is tangible in numerical terms. It's tangible in what we understand as an acceptable practice.

So I'm trying to think of an alternative that—uh, yeah, to go to that MTNS thing. He is organizing a talk on campus. Legislature legitimate. How many feel that organizing a talk in educational institutions is okay? How many feel that we should not organize talks on campuses? Okay. So clearly, there is consensus on whether lecture should be ordered or not.

Additionally, how many think it is all right for political and religious events to be in our campus? How many think it is not all right for political and religious events to be in our campus? Okay.

Is it all right for students to organize events on campus by themselves? How many consider that is legitimate? Okay. How many think that students should not organize without prior permission and without getting permission? Invite a particular speaker or another particular speaker.

So, essentially, that email thread that came after the announcement of the talk was deliberation. I mean, actually, it's not deliberation; it's people yelling at each other. But deliberation is when you say why this is good, why this is not good, why this should be allowed, and why this should not be allowed.

That more and more—you—that question of whether religious and political events on campus should be allowed or not be allowed is a normative question. It's not something that I'm measuring, saying, "'Cause there will be ten people who say no, there are nine people who say yes." Does that mean that, yes, this is indeed legitimate or not legitimate? Maybe five years later, we have different people.

Uh, Tiruswari, you had your hand raised for a couple of hours, and I— Okay, other questions about legitimacy.

So think of legitimization and legitimacy as more about process rather than as something that we measure actively, as a way of supporting or justifying practice of power or practice of authority. Yeah, rather than a legendary—think of it as a normal—uh, computer science metaphor.

Okay, um, so I really want to finish this section today, uh, but I know that this is a bit heavy and this is a bit challenging. So we can take a break. Uh, but you need to come back live really soon. Yeah, like two, three minutes. Cool, okay, great.

How do we start a game using a class? Everything is useful. You are—I say you have the legitimacy to say non-useful things in class.

Okay, Peter, what is your question?

Our first statement: COVID times, mm, a guy was caught, uh, not very fast, so he was held up in a locker. And then his father was okay to reason, but he got a locker. There is a whole screen between both of them and both sides. How does it turn out?

That's what I said is not—but you said how—uh, that we have the bone acid and here also the animal basement. They just—you are in undergraduate studies, you have the ability to connect to the silver school class, connect it. I am just showing how they are able to however burn, how they work. And later, however, they got inquired in the class. Coherently, like cutting the dots.

You are not wrong. It’s a good example to talk about power of policy. So, the policemen use their power to imprison two people, right? So far, so good. The police seemed to assume that it had the authority to do so. Okay, that people are breaking those rules, who have the authority to lock them, correct?

Was it legitimate that they did so? No, right? That's what you are arguing. And the reason we know that this is not legitimate is because, A, there is no legal source of what they did.

So, to quickly add on to that, sometimes it is not only about legal source, right? So, for instance, sometimes godmen or Babas will declare something from a position of authority which does not really have any good legal source. But it depends on people whether they want to legitimize what their Baba is saying, yes or no.

So, in any context, in any situation, we can aim to identify a source with an authority, whether the practice of a power is legitimate.

Illegitimate, and whether this process of legitimization in any way helps us in understanding the kind of authority or the particular practice of power. Okay, now all of this is fine. Power is about making people behave in a certain way.

This is when somebody seems to enjoy a certain kind of power. Legitimacy seems to suggest that there is a way of considering a practice of power or the practice of authority as right or wrong. But one of the biggest questions in politics and political theory, as well as political practice, has been—and it's probably the most detailed of them all—the question of obligation.

It does not matter what kind of source of authority there is, it does not matter what kind of power is being practiced upon you, it does not matter whether that practice of power is legitimate or illegitimate, but whether we, as individuals, as members of society, as members of institutions, as members of communities and countries, are obligated to obey that particular practice of power. This is what gives you the agency to decide whether you want to accept power, not accept power, legitimize power, not legitimize power, identify authority or not identify authority.

Obligation seems to suggest that all of us are obliged to follow structures of power, all of us are obliged to follow authorities that exist. When you join a university, you are obligated to follow the 85% attendance norms, you are obligated to follow behavior in public, you are obligated to follow rules about dressing, what you can consume in the private safety rooms, et cetera, et cetera.

This seems to suggest that in any political structure or any political institution, you have to decide whether you consider it your duty to obey power and authority or whether you do not have the duty to obey. This has been at the core of probably—and something that binds all of this together is obligation—is nothing but whether you are obliged to give in to somebody's power, whether you have a duty to perform towards authority, very simply because by doing any of this, you are led by the practice of power.

So, any person who fulfills their duty as a citizen or a member of a community in recognizing the power, in recognizing the practice of power, and recognizing the authority automatically seems to suggest that I am obedient, that I am obligated towards doing the correct thing, the right thing, that I am obligated towards this authority even though I disagree with that authority.

But it is an inherently individual choice on how you consider your obligation towards your institution, your obligation towards your state. So, let's—there are two big ways in which we can understand this obligation. First, that legally obliged to do so. Can anyone guess what the second is?

So this is easy to understand: morally. Yeah, whether I'm morally obliged to do so. The question here is, with all individuals having these structures and rules and authorities, et cetera, et cetera, either I follow this because the law says I should do so. I drive on the left because the law asks me to do so. I should not drive more than 80 kilometers per hour because the law tells me I cannot drive more than 80 kilometers per hour.

On the other hand, there is no speed limit written on the road anywhere, but I still drive slowly because I seem to suggest I have some model of obligation towards fellow users of the road and people on the side: I do not want to hurt them, I do not want to kill them. So, the law may not exist, but I do have a certain morality within myself which makes me decide whether I obey or not.

Now, this is something that often comes to the forefront, e.g., again in the US the last couple of years, when there have been more and more bans on abortion. So, legally, you are not supposed to perform abortion because it's legal, so you have a legal obligation. But do you have a moral obligation to obey that law? Do you have a moral obligation of following through with that law? Are you disobeying because you legally disagree with it, or are you disobeying because you morally disagree with them? That is an important distinction to make.

I used two examples in the last class. Remember social contract. Social contract is something that falls a little bit between the two, and I'm explaining why. But I used the example of Gandhi and I used the example of—

So, when Gandhi goes on the Dandi March, on the Salt March, and this is the more of picking up a salt and saying, “This salt I will not pay tax on, this salt,” it says, “I do not legally—I am not legally obligated towards it,” right, towards the British Crown. This is something that most independent independence movement, especially local India movement, non-population movement, et cetera, et cetera, are saying: legally, I'm required to do this, but legally, I choose to disobey. Right. I choose to break the law because I consider the law itself as not legitimate.

As opposed to Thoreau, and if you read Thoreau's essay on the Quran, Thoreau says a very, very clear case. I believe that the state has the power to make laws, and yes, I am indeed obliged to follow those laws. So, Thoreau does not have a legal problem with obligation. Thoreau says that when I pay my taxes and my taxes are going to be used for a war, I do not want this because I am morally opposed to a war. I am morally opposed to taxpayers' money being used for a war. And therefore, I choose to disobey with the Of it and not pay my taxes because I consider it a morally wrong thing to do.

Now, what this allows us to see is there are two determinants for why somebody chooses to be obligated or not be obligated toward the state. One clearly constitutional legal rationale, saying, in fact, that when you drive without a helmet or when you decide to break the speed limit, it's not like you are doing civil disobedience. You are disobedient. But at that time, you are choosing to disobey laws because you don't have some sort of disregard for the law. But at a time when you choose to do something because you consider it right or wrong, regardless of the law, you are making a moral decision about your obligation towards that law.

Does that distinction make sense? So, social contract falls a little bit in the middle, even though it is more tended towards the legal, because social contract seems to suggest that all of us agreed to this contract of living in the state. And therefore, it doesn't make sense to not obey the state because you legally have some kind of process by which you created a rational legal authority, you created a constitution, you created the rules, and now you are saying, "I am no longer willing to follow the rules."

Also, it is also a little bit moral because social contracts suggest that, look, all of us have agreed to put some things aside and made choices about what we consider as morally right as a community. That as a community, we agree to say, "Yes, we will not torture. Yes, there should be no death penalty. Yes, everybody should get an education," and so on and so forth. So, these are all moral decisions that we have arrived at.

Now, following through with those moral decisions is also an individual choice because there will be times when those moral positions of the state will be different from the moral positions of individuals. There's a little bit more to do about obligation, but I can already see the energy you drained from your faces.

So we'll put it aside for next class. But if you want to ask questions about this distinction, we still have time for that.

Sorry? Yes, there is a test next class. So, it's that civil disobedience. Canter said he legally breaks it, but more than he is not breaking it because he answers to the higher code of the code of consciousness.

Yeah, I mean Gandhi is one of the most—Gandhi is extremely moral. If you read a lot of Gandhi, I thought there is a lot of morality there. But the act of dissolving salt tax—it's not a moral decision. In some ways it is, but I'll come to that later. But it is a legal decision that I should choose not to follow your law because your law itself is illegitimate. The moral part of it is that salt is an essential person of all human gains, and it is morally wrong to prevent what everybody should enjoy by making them pay for it. That's the moral part. But his mode of disobedience is a legal disobedience; it's not a moral disobedience.

In Socrates' case that I discussed last time, Socrates does not bring the helm up because he believes he is morally wrong. Socrates drinks the helm because he thinks that legally we are obliged to the state. Morally, he is completely dissatisfied with the state, that the state is wrong, and this is precisely why he was thrown into the prison, because he criticized the state. But legally he says I have to follow through with it. I will not disobey the state because I have agreed to be a part of the state.

So he says it's a very nice—he's a disciple Pedro, I'd say—where Socrates says, "Look, everything I am today is because of the state. I have grown up because of the state. I have enjoyed my freedom because of the state, because people have paid their taxes, because people have been obligated to the state. The fact that I would teach students is because of the state. It's because of the fact that everyone follows the norms of the state. And a good society, therefore, is built upon the state.

"And therefore, if at this moment of time I suddenly say, 'No, no, I have a moral opposition to the state, and I'm not going to drink the poison,' then I am wrong." Because he says that clearly, legitimately, the power of the state is the power to execute citizens who are dangerous to the state. So, if the state considers you to be dangerous, it should execute you. There should be no objection. Morally, I have a different moral position from that of the state.

And then I'll send the passage of Lukas. You get that?

So if you consider power, are you only then opting to follow through with the imposition of that power, or is it something else? If you consider power as registriment, like one application of power.

So I'm trying to think of a—so if I consider that the government of India is an institutional government, then only then are you obliged to follow the rule? Whatever the lawyer obliged—no, not necessarily.

In fact, quite often, the party that you may believe in the state—you may consider that the government is legitimate—but every act of the government needs—not—you will not be obligated to it.

And again, a great example of this is Gandhi, but Thoreau. Thoreau is recognizing the authority of the state. He doesn't have a power of the authority of the state. But he is choosing not to follow the authority of the state because he has a moral dispensation. He doesn't have a legal dispensation. He is not questioning the authority; he is not questioning the legitimacy of the government either. He is just saying, this is law.

So he is, in fact, saying the state has the authority to put in decision, the state is the legitimate source of taxation. What he has a problem with is that using this money for war is an illegitimate use because it is against my morality. Obligated to pay taxes, but he is choosing not to do so.

So, obligation to do—there are still other competitions there, even if he is choosing to ignore the obligation. So again, do not think of it as one needs to have this in order to have that.

The American government as a legitimate government. Cool?

Yes. But he does not consider—and he considers that the American government collecting taxes is legitimate. The American government spending taxes is also legitimate. But I do not want my money to be spent on war, and therefore I am morally not obliged to pay my taxes, even though I believe in the legitimacy of the government.

And then it's a bit difficult in today's day, but even in today's day, you have mental examples that people who are charged with being anti-national or anti-setish are not necessarily questioning the authority of the state. They are questioning what the state is doing, whether they're obligated to follow it, whether what the state is doing is legitimate or not.

And maybe—I mean, think of a mind map, not a mind map, but like a script thing to understand the decision made. But don't necessarily think one is limited at all.

Okay, I will see you on Tuesday.

So what topics will we cover in the test on this?

Everything that you cover in class.

Yes.

When are we getting back from Technology?

They have been collected yesterday, and you should get it all on Monday. And I have had it over with the TA. And I will review the first paper and adjust marks if necessary. But if that will take you a bit of time, okay.

See you on Tuesday.

You need to put it up. So let's have a lot of credit for the stable. I will—I don't know. Are there a movie movie?
