Der läuft jetzt. Ist nicht ganz kalibriert. So, jetzt darfst du die Probe wieder sauber machen. Jetzt fahren wir die Probe wieder. So, das war's für heute.

Ich habe noch eine Frage. Ich habe noch eine Frage. So, ich habe eine Frage.

I joined a society a couple of years back, which I think is sociology, and specifically my research area is digital sociology, which means I look into how technology transforms society or how society is transformed. That's a basic question. Currently researching a bit at work. My broader specialization is platform critical. But some questions were on AI and health. Some were on influencer cultures. Some were on nodding, cringe, and so on.

Now, what we do today in India and moving into is the first half of this course, the CH1, which is going to be conducted by me. And it's going to be about sociology. So, generally, how we introduce the subject is I tell you about the history of the subject. Why is this interesting? Try to get your attention. But after that, I tell you: what does sociology work with? What does sociology have to say about religion? But since you are CHD students and you gain a master's, I'm not going to do this. This course is going to be reading.

What we will do is—come sit, sit, sit. This course will start out with: what is sociology? We'll talk a bit about the history because then you only know what is there. Then we'll go into specific scholars and how they research sociology, more thinking about perspectives.

Now, how many of you have played a game called Jenga? Can you discuss? Hands up. How many of you haven't played a game called Jenga but don't know what Jenga is? Go. Hands up. You don't know what Jenga is? No.

So, your job is to stack yourself. It's already stacked. Just keep it. Now, the idea here is: what is sociology? You're going to go to sociology. Only normal answers. Don't lie down. What is sociology?

Work, academics, society.

First rule: you don't die too high. Second rule: you ask permission from the authorities—whatever, washroom, whatever—to sort of have a family. Ask also society.

Now, you, what is society?

Basically, it's going to be the way, the study of society and how people interact.

Any other weird answer?

Maybe we can think of it as psychology but for societies instead of individuals.

So, you think psychology but for the group.

For the group. Now, how society, how groups of people come together to form a society, and all that.

Now, what I was saying: sociology is something in which we try to understand the tension between an individual and a broader group. This broader group, you have been talking in terms of society and others. This group can be a group as a whole, vis-à-vis the entire Tuklai community. That tension, that relationship is present. That is what sociology tries to do.

Now, this relationship—where did we start our relationship? Where did we start forming our relationship with our group? For what purpose?

To get a new person.

Why? Why does it want to form a group? We are very interested in the fact that it's random. What's the purpose?

One purpose that we can say is to get a better idea of the group. We have to cooperate with the rest of the class. The purpose is all of you want to continue education after your class 12. Tuklai is a place where you come. If you were born somewhere else, a different cohort will come. That's the purpose.

And yes, somebody said it is almost by force to join in, that we have to interact with this group also. So, some of you are sub-categorically predicting. That's the question I'm asking.

Now, these are not something that one can always choose. You have some flexibility when it came to choosing the college. Once you get this degree, that is. So, what is there is something called choice, but there are also restrictions. This is what I was calling attention. The choice is what in sociology or in social science is termed as agency. What kind of capability or capacity do you have to manipulate the surroundings, vis-à-vis time and space? That's agency.

Restrictions come from certain kinds of structures. The structure here is Tuklai. It was a series degree, a series degree and a couple of more degrees here in the school. It's a restriction.

Now, what's still here? We're still working around the idea of Tuklai. Now, let's go beyond that. How many of you are on Instagram? Wrong question. How many of you are not on Instagram?

I want to know the social media. Is LinkedIn social media? Are you on LinkedIn? I want to know the social media. But I get to places where you post things, and it is called wider reading. So, at least you're on Facebook. Are you on Facebook? You're not on Facebook. So, how do you get to know about the world? Because everything is happening here.

You read newspapers. But do people force newspapers on you like students or something like that?

No.

So, we have to take this idea: what is sociology? We all believe that the Indian education system could be better. How many of you believe the Indian education system is the best and it's in its prime? It's okay if you still think so.

No, still not possible.

Another way that you can think about sociology is that it's a subject which is going to solve social problems. Very common. But let's take that argument. Sociology helps us to solve social problems. If the Indian education system is not at its prime and has many loopholes, then it's a social problem? You agree? Some of you can.

So, let's talk about the issues with the education system. You all could tell me that. Let's list it away. We'll write it as problems. Okay, list the problems with the Indian education system.

Curriculum.

What about curriculum?

Okay, great. So, curriculum focuses on merit or not merit. It's much more about efficiency. It's all about it. Whatever you learn, learn it for a purpose.

Rural-urban divide.

Is it okay? Is it a small issue?

Privatisation.

More STEM-focused than other fields.

A hierarchy in subjects.

Just write a hierarchy in subjects. Let's start taking notes, guys. Anything else?

Around energy infrastructure, I'm sure.

You're saying there are students who are overworked?

In the curriculum, can you just write under—dash—and say, teaching what doesn't matter?

Can you give me an example from IIIT?

I'm not from IIIT.

Sure, IIIT also has things that you have an opinion on. But that's okay. Next person.

Policy implementation, discrepancy across the regions. Like, they make a global, uniform policy, but the time it takes to implement it is very different.

Policy paralysis.

Inexperienced educators.

Quality of teaching.

You have the complaint of colleges also?

In schools in general.

High weightage that certain exams like CATs.

Is it a hierarchy in examination?

No, it's a system.

Hierarchy in examination. This is a very important and current context.

Lack of seats in good institutions as compared to the population of applicants.

Lack of quality institutions.

Is it linked to the rural-urban divide also?

Not enough practical learning and more hands-on learning.

Not enough practical knowledge. Or rather, can we just write at the top of your list: put a dash and write lack of hands-on experience.

Lack of encouragement when it comes to arts.

Tell me if this sounds about right. You have something else to say?

Lower enrollment of upper castes and all of the rest.

Okay. So, beside class, write class and just put a comma.

Anything else?

Now, here's a word of Pandora's box. There are multiple other problems. Now, I'll say, first of all, you write class. What do you want to write? It can be beautiful. Most of it. Just write gender. And we have religion. Religion is opportunities mattering from which caste, gender, and which religion.

Can we just write for formal and curriculum? And people now who are on Instagram, right? What have you been doing the last couple of weeks? Are you on Instagram? What is the discussion on? About what?

So, where is the point of evaluation? Write corruption as a different point and write evaluation.

There is another thing that's linked to this entire CGP protest that happened, right? What is CGP? Does everybody know what CGP is? Somebody who doesn't know what CGP is?

Okay, let me quiz. What is CGP? Possible idea? Called? What after that?

Yes, it's called Talk with Jhala. It's a satirical form.

Why did they start protesting? What pushed them to start protesting? There's one thing I want to ask. Can you hear what he's saying?

So, if she can't hear, what then? My next question is: this is the initiation. Now, they're on the streets. What is their demand and why are they demanding it? What has happened in between?

That's not it. There's something else that they're talking about.

Yes, so first thing, when we're talking about people at Aligarhabad College, there's a picture, a mental picture right now. What does it mean, mental picture? Even till now, Westerners, some people said nerd, some people said... So, strongness is the psychological picture. There's a difference. We'll come to that.

Now, all of this falls under the category of what is part of the—when it comes to that tension—either it's structural or it's individual. Right?

So, let's say: memorization, lack of hands-on experience. Is it an individual's problem or a structural problem?

Structural.

Good. Let's stamp all this.

Curriculum efficiency, teaching what doesn't matter. Is it structural or is it individual?

Structural. It's also individual.

Right. Let's say that I have taken this class today. I just folded it into a different form, right? I've got this camera with my slides here and said, “This is my slide. Ratify this entire slide. This is the chapter from which income.” I have that choice as a teacher. It's both structural as well as individual.

It is also structural for a teacher because we are overburdened in teaching. So now what we do is that let's just shift ourselves to the standpoint of a teacher. If that person is expected to teach eight to nine hours a week, we are very low-level. On average, we teach five hours a week throughout the year, if I'm averaging it out in HPFC. There are centres which teach two hours, faculty school two hours per week, right? We are at a very good average. I know of my batchmates who teach 13 to 14 hours a week for a year. If you're expecting them to do this, there's no surprise, my guy. Where do I think about all this? I go there, teach what's in the chapter, do whatever you want, right? It's structural, but it's also an individual choice. For us here, I'll say it is a personal choice.

Now let's put two here as well as here.

Now, the rule of the way, is it structural or individual?

It is structural.

Does anyone disagree? Please stay behind.

Competition.

Structural. Structural, I understand this as an example. Why is it also an individual's issue? And you have to give me an example, without naming a person or people, of a behaviour that you've seen. Because it's individual, right? You have to state a belief. Why is it individual?

I think it's individual because if someone grows up in an environment where they see everyone indulging themselves in this competition with hopes of having a better life in the future, then they themselves develop this behaviour.

We are structural.

But isn't it also an individual choice to indulge in that competition rather than moving away from it and figuring out... You know what? I have something to add. In a family where the population is like half of the other people, I don't think competition would be that kind of a problem. If you just say that it's a structural problem, but it's not exactly individual.

Yeah, that's why, see, the structural point everybody's agreeing to. I'm just talking at the level of individual. What is it about competition in individual?

First of all, I'm sorry, because I completely agree with you. It's a question of if there is a certain kind of choice that people might have.

If you want something in life, then you will have to just do that.

My question is, if you want more money, you don't need to be competitive with others. Why? If you want more money, isn't the idea that if you work hard, you earn money? That's the entire thought process. If I work hard, I'm going to earn more money. If you get high marks, why is it important for somebody else to get lower marks than you? That is competition.

The idea here is that, and that's where the question of psychology also comes in, that there are individuals, even if they're privileged—like if you have lots of very privileged campuses, let's not even think about it. If you think that IITs are better than this, you're thinking from the competition space. It's a very privileged campus to be in this space. Here, people can undo this idea of competition. There is the idea. That space is there, but it doesn't happen. So it is both a structural issue, but it's also an individual's choice at some point.

The individual's choice is very difficult to make. The reason is the structure will push you. For example, I'll give you an example. In one of our exams last semester, there was a question and there was a mistake in the question. It was not a mistake in the wording or anything, but the mistake was that we had given an opening as an answer, but there could be other answers there too, and people had written that. So we took a call that both the answers were correct, but then what we thought is that since there has been this answer confusion, let's give five marks to whoever has attempted this question. Makes sense? If you have attempted, you get the marks.

There were people in our office telling us, “You can't do that.”

Why?

“You can't do that because somebody else's grades will get reduced.”

Your grades are not going to get reduced.

“No, but you know what? I was judged in the other question, but they are not being judged.”

The entire idea is not even what I am doing. The entire idea is my aspirations, my goals, my purposes are linked to somebody else's failure.

But if you think about the idea of a meritocratic society, it's about “I will work hard and I'll be rich.” Nothing else possible.

How many of you come from a Hindi-speaking Indian background? How many of you understand Hindi? There's a term in Hindi, right? So there's a proverb there, right? And the proverb in English translates into that: “If I work hard...” It's a very famous thing. It's called “चार लोग क्या कहेंगे.” You understand what it means? It's “What will the others say?”, right?

And there will be reels after reels I've seen where people have said, “Who are these four people? Don't they have a job? Why do I want to think about these four people? My relatives don't matter. I will do what I want. Who am I thinking about my family?” That's it.

But “चार लोग क्या कहेंगे” is a very important thing when it comes to the question of competition, because there is this imaginary idea of those four people that really motivates individual competition.

Now, the third point is in both the cases. Now, privatisation: is it structural or is it individual?

How many of you play sleep legwork? Any of you play sleep legwork? So, in ISKCON, you know ISKCON? Institute of Business, that's the name of it. There's an exercise that they do at an 8 a.m. class. Whenever the students enter, these are all graduates, they might be working somewhere, they'll have their black coffee, they'll come in. Every bench has a name. So Yashu has got our name printed. This is Yashu's bench for the next night.

So, the instructor enters, makes everybody stand up, and makes everybody do squats and jumping jacks. So, if you feel sleepy, let me know. We can do an exercise here, because I don't have a better time to teach than 2 to 3:30 in this kind of order.

Now, privatisation is here. Hierarchy, risk, let's say. Is it structural or is it individual?

Okay, great. Now, the sixth one. So, when I was doing my class 12, I was a science graduate. And the idea was that after my science, I didn't do any of me, engineering, anything. The idea was that I want to go into research. Did my bachelor's from Calcutta University, then went to another IIT, master's in sciences. Then I went to IC Bangalore, spent a couple of years there. Then I thought that I don't like this. I don't. I should do something else.

Now, to be very honest, my parents were not very encouraging in writing arts, class 9. Because what will you do after two years? What is English arts? You will read novels. And it's fine. I think it's not them. It's the entire group of people that thought very simply. Specifically, interestingly, this matter. As a man in this country, English, history, sociology, psychology—women doing it, maybe it's okay. A man? Men do science. Think about the great scientists. How many women scientists do you know? I bet you know only one very famous one. Who's that? And maybe someone. But how many names of male scientists do you know right now? Everything. From computer science, physics, maths, biology, chemistry. I'm sure every one of you will list at least five to ten right now.

So it's actually that structured. Again, when it came to solutions, the question here is: what is that push that there is? I'm talking about my generation, to say that science is not everything.

First, exactly what you're saying, there was already a hierarchy of STEM that people could literally observe, because science values are easier to observe. That was very much there. But it was also individuals' faith that in the social ranking, it was important that their child at least did science, if not engineering or whatever. There's a hierarchy that the family is being created.

Now the other question is, if you think about it, anyone from Delhi here? Where in Delhi?

I was in South Delhi.

Which part of South Delhi?

There are areas in Delhi—I'm talking about Delhi because I know Delhi people—there are areas in Delhi which are very elite spaces. Gardens, also South Texas, which is quite elite. In those spaces, if you were there, it would be great if you did English in your family, because they had that kind of socialisation that you understand. You can do great things from English. That socialisation never reached people of a certain class and caste.

For them, it was what gets you a job. See, yes, it is very much structural, but we were saying that it is individual, right? Doesn't matter.

Okay, infrastructure. So I've been told I'm not writing this. I'll help you. This is structural, yes.

See, overwork: there are overworked students and teachers. Is it structural or is it individual?

Structural.

Some people want to say individual. Why do you think people cannot work beyond commission?

Competition.

So, number eight is the goal. Somehow, individual is turning out to be the goal.

Then, fraud. Now, I'll ask a very nice question. Please be honest; it's going nowhere. How many of you have used AI for an assignment and not for your exam?

Oh, don't go there. Why is it going to go wrong if I...

Now, policy paralysis.

Structural.

Quality of teaching.

Individual. It's also hierarchical. So it's both structural and individual. It's also hierarchical.

Say there's a bias. Let's say that I... Listen, it's a plan, right? You know something. Listen, something else about it. From a label-granting, you know what a label-granting is? It's a minister. And he says, “You know what? My nephew is a boss out from Harvard. Hire him, Mr. Rao.” Without any evaluation of that. What was the guarantee? I don't know. Maybe he could be. But that is, in principle, that idea of that.

So what's happening to him? What's also the next one?

High-key exam. Yes, some exams are placed higher. NEET, IIT training is up there, while other exams are not really needed.

Structural.

Again, somebody gave me the go-ahead. It might be individual as well, because it's the same idea of STEM as well.

So what we're doing right now is going to help us play this game of Jenga. So please help me. Then there is quality indicators. I think it's the same, right? For the teaching and the study, right?

After this class and reservation, how many of you believe it's a structural problem? Anybody believes it's a structural problem?

It's both an individual and a structural problem, in my opinion.

Great. Now, you need to list out two reasons about why it's individual, not one. And it has to be opposite to each other.

First one being, it is very deeply rooted in our culture that some castes are considered superior to others. So that obviously creates a difference. Some castes are considered superior; even today it is very, very difficult.

And the second one being, because the structure enables that thought, a lot of people don't even feel like they're doing anything wrong with that thought. And that is why this further exponentially increases.

So some people believe that, because this is hugely technical. After CGP protests, is there any other reservation on Instagram? You are not on Instagram, right?

I was.

Don't be; it's not important. Check there; it's your hand.

So that page has 160 million followers, but right now there's a reservation now. I'll do a debate, that's a positive one. That's a debate that's going on in every one of my classes. And it is: reservation conserves caste. It will die down if there is no reservation. Is there any difference? Reservation is what sustains caste discrimination.

I know. I'm saying, does anybody agree with this? Or somebody's like, “I'm a priest, I'm an atheist, I'm a Gnostic, I don't know,” but that's also fine.

In any debate, the caste person who comes to reserve, even though they have a debate, they still feel that this thing can't happen. It's always there, really. The feeling is there, right? But that doesn't exactly prove my point, that reservation actually preserves caste discrimination. Because how do you know if that person was not in your institute, but you had met him in another space, this person wouldn't have discriminated also? Is there a guarantee?

I'll give you the other space. So he's saying that in this institute, I know that somebody has come through reservation, and so he doesn't have caste reservation. Doesn't matter.

Let's say this had caste reservation. Let's say HECAM has caste reservation, right? If somebody comes through reservation, I, the person of upper caste who's not come through reservation, am going to always discriminate, thinking that this person does not have a name. This is happening.

What I'm asking you is, when the person belonging to the lower caste, if I met them in some other space, not in an educational institute, what is the guarantee I wouldn't discriminate? Is there a guarantee that if you don't have a caste system, all the people who discriminated within their educational institute wouldn't have discriminated anymore?

I'll give you an example. It's very complicated. This is a question I ask, and everybody either puts their heads down in the class or they become mute. But in this age, I think everybody should know about it.

You know about dating apps? Everybody knows? Okay, name one of the dating apps.

Tinder.

Am I old?

No, for me it was Tinder.

Tinder? Okay. So there's Hinge, Bumble, Tinder. For queer people, there's Grindr. There's a plethora of dating apps, right? I'm just going to squeeze it down to heterosexual relationships.

It's found that even on Tinder, if it is a short-term engagement that somebody is seeking—a single date or maybe a few months—caste doesn't matter. The moment it goes on the idea of a long-term engagement, caste starts to matter.

So if I were to take something like an Hinge or a Tinder, these are the apps. In it, everybody is trying to date within their caste boundaries, right? Or at least if you're around them. If you're not on Tinder, maybe you'll find them on a different dating app.

And this is interesting, right? Because what are dating apps for?

What are dating apps for?

I thought dating apps are for introverts.

Yeah, because that's the idea, right? Because I would like to seek somebody out there as a chance because I find it difficult to go. That's why you're dating. There's other reasons.

For dating apps coming into the world, it's: I will date within the vicinity. I don't want to go beyond. Let's say I'm on campus. I want to date beyond. The third is that you're also quite safe to start a conversation on the chat rather than going up front and saying, “I like you. Can I go over?” This entire thing is very scary, I can tell you. For us, it's not a lot. For me, it's very scary. So it was much easier.

So the affordance that dating apps bring is: it kills proximity, it kills awkwardness, right? But it does. We'll talk about what it does in a different class. But it's interesting, this conversation in a different space, which is not education. People are judging, while judging is still eating them.

Thus, if we get rid of reservation, caste discrimination doesn't work. “Doesn't help to reduce caste discrimination” is a different question. We can get to that question when we read 10,000 words.

Okay, now a lot of discussion has come to gender. This one goes to the structure.

Structure, absolutely.

Can we also put an individual? Because I think there are people who understand the entire issue but still choose not to be progressive.

Now we have gender. How many believe that gender discrimination is unlike the gender discrimination? Forget that there are two genders. First thing is that. It's not male and female. It's a spectrum.

How many believe that gender discrimination is a product of structure?

What is it not? What is it not? Give me a reason why it's structural.

It is law, or the law that you believe.

The trans bill, yes. So what was there in the bill? What is propagating in the bill? Has anybody?

One sec. Anybody else?

Yes, that was something: if you are self-identifying, you have to go for a medical examination, not in a place of your choice, in a government hospital. The disbursement of the office will be done. So it's both structural as well as...

Okay, let me ask you a question. You can choose not to answer. But since this is a sociology class, we are all going to get talked about. Because I right now spoke about my dating problems. How many of you have seen gender discrimination in this class? Or any kind? Or no gender discrimination? In this campus? You have seen that?

I'll give you an example of gender discrimination in this campus. I'm not asking about you. There is this entire idea that computing is a masculine trait. How many of you believe that? Computing is a masculine trait? This is an idea that's out there in this world. Men are better at coding. Have you heard this?

You haven't heard this? If you haven't heard this, just look at the gender proportion of top Meta, Google, and other companies. They prove it by their hiring, that they believe that men are better than women in programming.

Now, the problem here is what we spoke about when it came to lack of encouragement, right? This is the issue. They homogenise the idea of computation. India has a space in the 90s which was around a lot of fast countries after the United States, which talks about hacker culture.

What is hacker culture?

Free software.

You can scale it by default. It's not masculine anymore. The entire computing becomes an industry rather than a culture. In my current work—this is just my hobby, it's not my research—I find there are so many women from Kerala and Bangalore who are part of our cultures. Because the industry is taken over, right? And the culture died. We still have certain active groups there.

In many ways, computing is very structural. Anyway, that's what gender would have been about.

Okay, religion.

Both structural and individual.

I'll tell you an example of why it's structural. There is an old college in Uttar Pradesh, in Baraj. There are 40 buildings in this university. Can you imagine how big the campus would be? It has 40 buildings. They wanted to demolish 38 of them, saying that it's not safe.

You know what was happening in the university? Why? They wanted to break it down just after the CJP protests started. It's a Muslim institution. And that campus was actually against whatever was happening in the CJP.

The first thought: break down 38 buildings. Can they go to Barasan University? They broke the council. Can they go to us? They don't want to leave. They are very ready to move on.

Currently, the GC government is helping out students. Without permission, they cannot go. But it's very easy for them. That proves that it's also structural as well as individual. Individual because of caste and gender, as we are talking about.

Now, functional: is it individual or is it structural?

Both.

What do you mean when you wrote evaluation?

Exams?

Yes.

Chemistry, structure.

Why PR accountable?

Accountable to individuals and structures. And it's also accountable to individuals. That's why they ask the resignation of the developer.

So, can we go with that?

Now, I feel like you take this as a structural view. Is it because of me? Let's go to the next one.

Mental health.

Now comes the single argument that sociologists are talking about. Your mental health is all about you. After going through this entire laundry list, if I were to say mental health is a product of who you are and whether you're doing meditation and yoga, that is the sole difference between psychology and sociology.

What we are trying to say is, if I have so many reasons which fall into a structure and all of this, I'm sure it's contributing to mental health. How is it just for me?

You might have, we all might have, a mental condition. My friends, I had a huge issue with ADHD. I still have 50 tasks open on this. I still have an issue with ADHD. Or my friends, because it helps them with their issue. But does it capture mental health?

The condition—a mental health care broadly means how you feel on an everyday basis. It's not about whether you sometimes will have yourself. What's the constant state of being that somebody is in?

And I would like to argue as a sociologist—I'm sure Priya might argue differently from me—that all the things that we've listed in the structure are actually enablers or variables for the state of mind that I am in right now. Right now I'm agreeing with my mind. So I would argue that it is a structural thing, but it might also be an individual thing if you have certain kinds of issues. So we need to put it in both cases.

Great. Now what we'll do is, one of you will come—each one of you will come—and on the side of this, you will write one of the numbers. So maybe you're writing number one, so one goes here. Now for us, you took it out from this one? We'll place it on top of this.

This is the structure of an ideal education system where none of these—these can be structures or individuals—are there. We have to reach this. We're taking out all of them. Is it impossible, or is it not possible?

My proposition is, okay, first of all, how does gender work? I need to demonstrate to us where gender was completed.

Come, listen, what do you mean? Take this. By the way, you people can't even sit here. We'll do this. You can go to my room. Leave your notebooks. I'm not giving you any notes. None of this will come to the exam, obviously.

Take your chairs, otherwise you won't be able to... I don't want you to be a spectator. I know some people probably prefer the last bench, but it is not possible in this global context. Take your chairs, come, sit here.

Is it possible to see by Ayush this stack? It's okay? Great. You know how to build gender. Teach them, but first of all, let's place this on the top of this. I'm sure I will make it fall now.

Can you do this?

This is Jenga without sociology, first of all, the demonstration. I'll bring in the sociology later on.

Do you want me to explain? So basically, gender is: you take turns picking out one piece at a time and you have to keep the structure intact. The person who takes a piece out and the structure breaks—that's it. You will take one piece out of it, right, making sure the structure doesn't fall. If you make it fall, the person just before you wins the game.

My proposition is, the entire block here is a perfect education. You need to empty this entire thing and come to this block. Keep on taking out. It should happen, right?

No, first of all, don't take it out. First of all, one person will come. You put a number, any one of them, in one of the stacks on the sides. Put them. The first person, right away, is writing, which is put a number there. On the outside, okay? Put a number there. Great. You come. It's okay if it falls after this. You can take any of them. You can put all of them down. Okay, let's go. Put any number. On the sides, okay? Not on the top. You know the numbers, right?

Yeah. Great.

How many of you believe it's possible?

I believe it's possible.

Then, okay, by the way, where do you put the numbers? Next person. Next block.

How many of you believe Voldemort wouldn't have been Voldemort with Harry Potter? How many of you believe Voldemort wouldn't have been so evil if it was not for the structure? Or was it an individual?

Whatever you want to write it, I'll tell you, because they can see it.

How many believe that it was an individually evil person and not the structure? How many believe it was structurally evil that was happening in the Wizarding World?

Yes, you can answer. You want to understand something. You can emphasise that Voldemort was from a family who was trying to be understood.

Now I'll ask a little question. How many believe that Donald Trump is a product of the system or is an individual thing? What would you answer? Forget about Voldemort. A life? President of the United States? Whatever he is, is it an individual characteristic or is it a structural issue?

Wow. For Donald Trump it's both; for Voldemort it's just personal.

If you know about Voldemort...

It's structural?

It's related to the shape of the region.

It's okay, it's regional, right? So we can actually put it in the Buddha world. But I also have to...

Yes, yes. It's a modern case.

Please talk about the public image.

The President asked the public whether it is by the system.

Yes, yes. The public image is a structural issue.

Okay, it's a regional issue, right? So we can actually put it in the Buddha world. But I also have to...

Yes, yes. It's a modern case. The President asked the public whether it is by the system.

But the interesting part is that all good movie villains, if you think about it from a story, are mean as if they are individual characters. That's how stories are written. But that's not all life is.

So what he's saying about Voldemort, that's literally the presentation of it. There's something wrong with the system, right?

But let's tell you what you know about the Harry Potter movies. Do you know about Dumbledore? He's a person who knew about the entire story before anybody else. And yet he let that boy, who had suffered for 12 years because Voldemort defeated him, think about Harry's mental state.

What would it be to be Harry Potter? Every year you want him to die. Every year there's a possibility that he could die. He has a 50–50 chance. He survived because of his story.

I'm sorry, you lost a great chance.

Yeah, of course. Yeah, possible. Do you want to do this? Everybody's done?

Now it's possible, no? Come on, take the 50.

Okay, now you see if all of them are numbered, otherwise fill in the rest.

You were saying something, yes?

Number one is not a solution, because if we are active, it's a problem.

That's what I'm saying. Again, community becomes this wholly other power character, and Voldemort becomes the most class character ever, because right now they're writing, they don't consider it.

Psychologists will write with anger that there's something innately wrong with people, or there's something innately evil with people. That is where the contradiction comes in psychology and sociology. Because we don't believe that there's anything innately wrong with anyone. Something physical might be there; you might have a mental health issue, or a mental condition—not a health issue, it's a mental condition you might have. But if you're born with some kind of evil in mind, if I keep on changing your places around him, you behave in a different way. I'm just getting into a different psychology.

Done? Now stack it up. It doesn't matter; it can be random. If you get that block, you tell me, you will lose that.

Let's say number four comes out of the stack. We will say number four—what is it?

Competition.

We have solved the competition issue. The moment this comes out, it means that we have solved that problem. I don't know how to solve it, but we'll take it for granted that we'll solve it.

We need help. Do you have an indoor playground here, with games in this house? No, I'm sure they're putting something. Because ideally nobody will have all kinds of games.

The other important thing that we need to know while stacking it up: your TA is going to be there. You know who Beverly is? She's a senior. Probably all your collections are going to be done by Beverly. She's only there to help with the uploading and other things.

The evaluation for H1, which has been commented about, you're going to have a mid-semester, which is going to be 20% of your grade, and 30% of this around a project. We'll discuss more on the project after we upload the model things. So it's something around the project. We'll take up an issue in education, and we'll try to sociologically unpack it. That's your assignment. And the tools of how you'll unpack it will be provided in the beginning. We'll talk about all that later. It's going to be due one week before the mid-semester. Then we'll have a resolution with all of us in the group. That's the starting point.

Now, who's going to do the honours? Will you do the honours?

No, that's kind of a question. Don't mind it. It's good that you're not going to do it. I don't want to do the honours. I'm not addicted to it.

Pick up anything. It will not make the structure work, because you have to do it step by step.

Yes, when you solve this issue, you need to have an intact education system.

Oh, okay. Don't take it out from this one, the problem. Just don't take it out. The one solution: first-bench people, take your chances from the last one. Because people there might be falling; people who can take it, take this bench. Don't take it.

It's okay if it falls; we'll again try again. It's fine. Now we're going to be doing four settlements. One hand, one hand.

This is not supposed to be random. It's okay, it's fine. Can you solve the problem? Can you pack number four on the list? What is this? Is this Star Wars or Harry Potter? Whose handwriting is this? Do you know what this is?

It's an H.

That was big. It's fine. It's okay. It's fine. The problem was not solved. Can you solve something? Can you stuff a part of 30 in there?

Great. Next person. It's okay. After you're done, move very slowly out of this.

All of the people who are not solving problems, you are preserving the status quo. At least we have education.

Is it solved?

Yes, it's solved.

Next person. Next person. Did you solve something?

What?

Very good. Data. Now we are giving people a clue about the data. See, if it falls, it means that the education system has stopped. We need to maintain the status quo in India. There is a way to do it.

No? I'm sure there is one. I can help you with that. It's okay if it falls. Do one thing. He said, let's give somebody else a chance. Come. Or we are locked.

Did he solve anything? We'll come back and tell you.

There is one thing to remember. When you find people in front of you, you say that the solution to this is A, B, or C. It is completely not logical. It's not true. From 1947 to 2026, we are struggling with these basic things. If you solve something, let us know. It takes real time. The time doesn't mean that people were wasting time. People were working on it. It's so difficult. It's literally people trying to fix it after the British left. And you have made a mess of it. That's great.

Next person, who was it? He did it. Can you stick it up? Let me sound that the solved of this class is 2, 4, 11, 13, and 4. If he died as an artist, he broke down everything.

Now my proposition is a very simple thing that I'm proposing. Of all this 19th theme, the first thing that we get to know is, when we talk about structure, it is built up of relations of power. And these relations of power are between institutions.

Here, institutions means caste is an institution, religion is an institution, gender is an institution, state is an institution, privatisation, market is an institution. It's relations of power between all these institutions that really compose the structure. And what this enables or disables are our individual choices. Not only choices, I'll just add another thing that's called our lifeworld.

Have you heard about this word called lifeworld? A very basic thing would be all of this. For example, my caste position can literally enable or disable a lot of power in educational grades, whatever.

The other thing that we haven't spoken about in the talk today is class. Not this class. Class here means what kind of economic background somebody has. How much money do somebody's parents, grandparents, and other people have? Definitely that is very important for schooling to this level.

So choices mean that these structures are somehow telling us: these are the options we have. Choose one. But I might have nine, he might have twelve, somebody might have just one. Somebody who has one means—one of the examples would be—in class 8, somebody's father dies in a Dalit village in Bihar and he has to go as a migrant worker to Delhi. He only had one option.

A woman whose college was in Kanpur—she was going to college. The moment COVID hit, she can't go to college anymore. She is also a cost in that sense to the students because she is not contributing to the household. First expectation: she has to go and do the household chores. The second is, now she is home, she is getting married. And a lot of women got married just by discontinuing education during the COVID times. This is a fallout that nobody thinks about. It's a consequence of state, market, and the family. So in that sense, your choices might be limited.

But when I say lifeworld, it's a very different concept. Lifeworld means an idea of self, then there is an idea of obedience or, let's say, respect to the community. Then there is also a certain thing like, let's say, starting a business. Self is good. Who you are to be, what you believe in.

That's something that is done is not possible. The choices that you make, the choices you'd like to make, and the self is basically a journey from who you are to what you want to be. This entire thing is the self.

Because all of those structures that exist, does it affect yourself? About your today, I want to hear through that example. That's already shortened your chance of becoming a doctor, unless you want to do the thing after what you want to do. Very few people do what you do. It's all the stream, right? The structure of the mind. Family and friends.

Who will be your friend? I'm sure there were a bunch of people, the classmates; they were much closer friends in the institute. But that has been enabled by you wanting to study engineering. Maybe your parents also wanted you to study engineering. Why they wanted you to become an engineer might not be just because it was your choice. And it's that engineering is sexy. Isn't it? Right? Triple I.D. is great. All of those played a role in my brain.

So your friends today, you call your friends in Triple I.D. It's just not standing in front of you. There are structures.

Well, in sociology, there are two statuses. One is achieved and one is ascribed. Achieved status or relations means things that we begin at birth. So, the parents you have has nothing to do with this concept. If you are a Hindu, the caste you were born into is nothing to do with you. You didn't come with a mobile life that I have done. Nobody comes with that.

So before you were born, some things were already there for you. That is known as the ascribed status. What is achieved is attention. Post-merger, you start making choices—achieved. The argument there is that structure actually enables or disables these sets of achieved statuses and relations.

For example, somebody started going out on Tinder. For a long-term relationship, somebody wants to actually... Even if Tinder was there, I was in school. And we were in class 11. So, I was in an all-boys school. I immediately started understanding that there they... You can talk with women when I was in class 11. Because before, till class 10, it's an all-boys school. It's a mess. And you don't know how to play football. You're fighting with each other, breaking your nose and legs. It was a very busy life.

But at 11, what happened is that some people in our class started dating. This is also based on the time when people go to tuitions. So, till 10, people don't take tuitions in Kolkata. When I was growing up, in 11, when they took the test, that is where people had been socialising. In that time, I had a friend who was a Brahmin. And he told me, “I'm dating a Brahmin.”

Now, I had no idea about classes. I was in an upper class. I had no idea about classes. And this struck me. But is love a product of...? These people say love at first sight. So, I look at somebody, I fall in love with somebody. That is what love is. How do you believe in a Brahmin? What class do you...? You fall in love at first sight. It's not an understanding that people have. Let's collaborate on this. It's something that should happen unintentionally, ideally. Instinctively, ideally.

You brought inside an accountant. So, even if you take the people in groups, I'm not dating a Brahmin. Maybe if you knew, the heart of it, the parents will create a problem. It's better that we get into the culture, maybe more in the long term. All those things matter to each other.

So somehow this achieved, what you think is achieved, even in a relationship, might be a product of a strategy.

Secondly, communication. So, when I saw this entire Gen Z—are you all Gen Z? Are you all Gen Z?—when you think about those people coming down the streets and the absolute mayhem content that they're doing, it's great when you think about it. It was very artistic. People have questions of profanity of the language. But I think profanity is something that was always there in our society. Just read Sadhak Mandu. Mandu writes about this during our independence. The kind of profanity in language that was there and the absolute abuse of gender, caste, and religion that has been done in the conversations. It's just that when it's valuable, it's not reasonable. It's flowing into the internet. My God, it's not fair. There have been abuses much worse than those done by my speech.

So, this profanity has come up. I see this entire lingo, what is called Gen Z language. But the best thing I've learned of this is this. Because now when I want to tell someone to shut up in my class, I'm just going to do this.

So this entire lingo that travels, it is a part or a symbol of communication. How is it that a woman in Delhi saying something is resonating with somebody down south? How is it happening?

The use of social media has automatically created what is, in other words, known as imagined communities. The skill of language of this—and every generation hates it—internet is going to march more value. That's why it's a community. This community is definitely not as valuable as achievement.

And for the protest to be successful, I don't know which side of the spectrum of politics you people stand on, but I am saying successful from this one point: they had a demand, they met at least the first point. You might not agree with it, you might agree with it, that's what it was. They had a demand, that's it. That's why it's successful. This wouldn't have been possible without this form of language and this idea of communicating with the school.

What is interesting about the language is how is imaging of... Somebody said about religion, right? I was talking about the example of this college English group in America, minority politics group. How is it that I see 19-year-olds lay down in front of the television, on camera, saying that I don't care about minority. I care about the religion. I have not got this discourse in the last 10 years.

The second thing that they are always saying is they have these posters of Bhagat Singh with them. They have Bhagat Singh, right? And I was like, how do these guys know about Bhagat Singh? Because I got his tears, right? Somehow what happened is the discourses of the past, the ideas of the past have not ceased to come. And a new generation of people still connect with that. That's why it's coming.

Now, the question of society. With the question of education, the society here I say is Indian society, but voilà, there's a surprise. On Instagram, there were posts from Pakistan. How many of you have seen those Pakistan posts?

So, Pakistani Gen Z and young people were posting, “I have a plan today to go to Jantar Mantar, but for the world.” It was chaos because then the influencers in India started posting, “Please don't post anything about our protest. The police is going to catch us.”

What has happened is, from a community-level, we have traversed a border, which is known as a country-level border, and you are talking about a society. It's linked with the idea of the 1970s, when from 1968 to 1971 across the globe, there were student protests happening left, right, and centre, from the tribes of Colombia to India. Everywhere there were student protests. One of those is like a map. And it keeps on inspiring, or it keeps on bringing us the kinds of demands.

What were the previous events before this student protest, globally, in the recent past? I can't tell you. What are the prior Gen Z student protests before 10 years?

Nepal and...

So now, it proves our point that we might be divided by borders, but ideas, images, people, information travel. And it travels forward. That is known as globalisation, with the flow of people, ideas, images, information, and things across borders. And this process is not—obviously there are frictions there.

What sociology does is to look at the connection to the self and the family and friends, self, family and friends, and the community and society. We take the centre of self and communities and find the relationship between all of this. That's what we are doing.

We have 10 minutes to work. We've done one. If you have any questions of any kind, I'm going to sign the two of you. And you have time. Questions?

How many of you have, by the way, ideas, thoughts, because you all...?

Yes, so what was the question?

Just like, did you get the change of the problem?

True.

Any other questions? We'll take the thoughts.

We discussed in our reading pages class as well. Can we have one class or one discussion about the computational methods in this particular field? Just to get an idea.

I think much better than I do. I'll ask Shabani and Anshita and Harini to come to talk about things, or language, Gen Z language. They can talk about it.

Any other questions?

The question that you're asking is really the idea of disinformation and misinformation. Misinformation means that when something spreads as it grows, but it doesn't have an intention to grow. It spreads, but I'll say that these are all reasons.

There's news that comes that a Muslim man harassed a Hindu woman. Now, if I'm keeping on pushing this news, and find this, let's take it up, because it's true, suddenly it is converted into a religionist bias towards women. It's disinformation.

Disinformation is when I create this news altogether that women did A, B, C to women, and B, A to C.

There's a big discussion when it comes to Meta, and at the level of Meta, how do you relate this? The entire Myanmar coup that has happened, where a genocide thing ended as well in Myanmar—the Rohingya crisis—it happened because of disinformation on Facebook.

So it's that thing: either positive things travel, neutral things travel, or negative things travel. How does something travel? Right now in Myanmar, people are doing it online. Now it has been in the data, and then this disinformation.

Yeah, for example, last semester we were doing this platform, social platform. Something that happened was in Brock, it could actually give you moods of people. This was uploaded to X. They said, “In Brock, you can use this,” and then it was filed, the company was filed. And this X spokesperson said that, “We can't do anything. It's the person's intent.”

So Casper Boston was asking a question. It's like telling that, okay, now there's a line—let's say not a line, a nuclear bomb. Let's talk about nuclear bombs. You have nuclear bombs, and you're like, okay, it's about the intentionality of the people, whether they use it or not use it. Why do you have nuclear bombs? Why do you need nuclear bombs?

The same goes for the kitchen knife. Definitely. Exactly. I want to ask someone with a kitchen knife to blame me or the person. The question is: does Brock need to have a speech and make people do it?

Again, it's a kitchen knife. My question here is that the platform is called X. Basically, when I used to use Twitter, 140 characters used to post; Twitter, comment there, people used to do that. Why does it need to have an AI which can definitely be used when I know that this society—not this society, I mean down south, or I mean broadly—this X is very useful in this society? And for it to be a help to a doctor, let's say, or somebody who lost, could you...?

Okay, now I have to ask a question. Can you give me one positive use of seeing somebody new on the internet?

Positive use.

An artist.

An artist? Sorry, before the internet came, how was he doing painting?

Yeah, I suppose.

So what did he have there, when the person was sitting in front of you, with a class of 20 people, sketching the new body? What did he have there which is missing now?

Silence.

Silence.

But then, the question of concept can't come if it's not meaningful. This is something that's why there's a problem. It will live in people then. So, it's a design problem, not a global problem.

Yeah, it's a design problem. But the problem that I have is with that.

Now let's go to others. Let's say it's fiction. It's fiction. So do you need explicit adult websites where it's there? Twitter is a world for 18 and above, everybody there. Why should that platform be supported? If you need Twitter, I don't have to do that. I'm asking that. You don't have AI role-playing apps created separately, have a subscription for that, do what you want.

But now we're seeing this. Let's say I've gone there to understand what's the content central to seeing influencers. And if that is a post about the student activist for Neha Bhogard, let's say—now it didn't happen—about the influencers. What does it mean? Why would you do something like that? And there are anonymous, faceless men, women, robot people. What do you mean, right?

That's what I'm saying. I'm saying that with the patient platform, you're going to get a few platforms having some identification, and then you can do it with any other people. And it is part of what is known as platform governance and regulation, but it was happening to a function. So it's completely false regulation.

Okay, are we done? You mean to sign? You want to say something? No questions, go on.

Cycle.

I just said, how important are the influencers as a leader?

Who?

Anand, it's given a system.

Yeah.

It's not the other one.

Think about the many Ramayans. There is a community Ramayan; there is not one Ramayan. In many of the cases, Ramayan is more important. I can't speak. I can move up ten minutes, but I will sign.

I didn't hear you. I didn't hear you. I just gave you the order.

What happened to the work that I have to do?

Next week, next week. Now then you can come.

Please give me the relationship of the government.

I will give you the relationship.

Is there a cost?

If you don't have a cost, you will be in trouble.

What is this? It's a very expensive thing. What is this? You can go in the morning. It's a small shop. You can go in the morning.

I feel like in the version, taking it time and taking it time. In other words, it's patient. It's a lot of time. What did you do?

I wrote a letter to my mother.
