Yeah, we are definitely better than them right now, at least. Oh no, Arsenal is definitely better than every other London club now. I don't know, because they are just getting on the list. So do you think they will pass them? I don't understand; they are all the last. I mean, when is Arsenal like 100? I saw that music. What's the signing? Kabul, Isio, Romano? Yeah. Then Salah, right? Salah also too messy, no? You messed up. I don't see it that way, but if you were to put it like that, probably La Migna. Within Argentina. Within Argentina? I don't think Argentina is floating after this.

I've been only watching since the last World Cup. You watched the last World Cup? Were you a senior then? Yeah, we were in 11th, 12th, J10. 2022? What were you doing in 2022? I was in 10th grade. Were you playing football on the campus? Yeah, I play more than I watch. Would you play any FIFA? A lot of FIFA. I was addicted to FIFA.

Come, come, come. There was a rule I said, right? Please don't ask this question. We should play some FIFA. Yeah, we should. But you have to lend me your... Where do you play? Laptop? Yeah, I play on the laptop. Then it's better because with the joystick I need to prepare. I need to take days.

I want a small help because the Moodle is not getting a hard or paste. Can you search for this book right now? It's called Anthony Giddens' Introduction to Sociology. What was the name of this book? Just search for that book. I want to also put out a piece of that book. There will be multiple editions. Ideally, it should be the 7th edition to the 9th edition. The 7th edition? Yeah. 7? I can't read it. Can you share it with the class? There are other two books that we have to read at the end of the class.

Are you doing your PhD in the subsclass now? Yes. Also, sir, regarding the class timings, we all agreed to... Now the problem is we are ready to change the class timing to 10. You need to mail me and Ishaq. Because the current class is in this and the second class is in this. I am not available. You are not available? It's okay, you have a word with him. I am just trying to find out. Will this start? On the team.

So what we will do in the next couple of lectures is broadly talk about sociology. What does it do? Formally, how did it come about? The development in sociology, those questions.

The first thing I would like to start with is this question of what is your 30%? I think that is important because this is a sociology project. This is 30% of the grades in the current program. H2 will be taken care of. So I have 50% of your grades, 30% is this, 20% is your research.

In the 30% of the project, you will choose a social problem or a social phenomenon. A social problem is something like dowry. Do you know what dowry is? Everyone in this class?

When a woman gets married to a man, but the groom's family expects hefty money from them for their marriage. Now, why is there dowry? Why do you think? What's the justification of dowry?

Because people are not stupid. If I ask money from Sidnath, Sidnath will ask the question, why? One of those things could be that since you are entering the family of the male and they have to spend money to take care of you, so that's why they ask for money.

It could be when people want to... So kingdoms, for example. A king wanted to affiliate himself with another king by getting his marriage to the son of the other king. So to establish that affiliation, they will give money to the other king. So marriage always had the concept across all the cultures of gift-giving. That's there. That's what you are talking about.

My question is, he said that it's because this woman is entering the groom's family. So it's like an elite club or a pub where you have an entry charge. It looks like that. Is it that, or is there something else to this marriage? So my question is, how do people justify it?

So looking from the bride's side, we can say that they want their daughter to be well settled and start off on a good note with the groom. So that's one justification. From the groom's side?

The point when it became a demand from the groom's side is where I guess the difference would be, but again, same thing to justify. A good settlement of the family and start of a young couple. Generally, as far as the families, both the sides of the family, they need resources, both the bride and the groom. So, I guess it's good enough for the groom. So, that's the only notion.

It is repeat only said in the video.

What?

It is repeat only said in the video, the groom's family. The groom and bride, both of them, they gave it. So, according to some old traditions, it just eventually got to the okay, only one part of the family. They come to the bride as groom.

Forget that this problem exists, and we'll come back to this later. What he's saying is that it has transformed from an older ritual of gift-giving. Any other justification? You know the question?

It's about dowry.

Yeah, it is about dowry, but that's not the point.

I don't want your opinion on dowry. I want to ask people who ask for dowry from the groom's family: what is the justification? Think about it. Sir, could it be seen as the groom has options, and whoever has a higher dowry, he will go to them?

Agreed. One point is the groom has options. Why does the groom have options? Options. So, interestingly, he said about marriage, of course he said it, that the man's family, the groom's family, charges her entry fee. You said options. What do you say? Is it not like you're paying money for the rest of your life? In the sense that you can take care of her for the rest of your life? You're saying that they are repeating the debt as soon as they get married?

No, it's like we're talking about this. It's like you're living for the rest of your life. We were living for that, and that takes money, so we give you money so you can take care of her. I think that was the point I was trying to make initially. It's just that there is a loan that can be prepared by the groom's family, in the sense that you have to pay for the person, you have to spend money, you have to pay for health care for the groom, some other expenses, and that's an expense that the bride's family doesn't have to pay, or does the dowry so we can just ease the economic problem that arises.

And to add on to that, they see the groom as the breadwinner and the responsible person. You want to write the term that we use for it later.

Now, even in this very casual discussion on dowry, we have so many types of justification, just from the justification side, at least four types of justification coming from our common sense. This entire project is about not finding a solution for dowry. I don't want any of you to think about what the solution is, because in your second year, first semester, you'll think of a solution. Just think about how many people have already thought about it.

The rice officer, it's a legal problem, right? So you're not in the business of finding a solution. We're in the business of understanding the veracity of the problem. How complicated is the problem? How layered is the problem? How do you do that? We'll talk about that later.

Now, all of this makes sense in a primitive, traditional society. But if you think about dowry debts and dowry-related domestic violence, you'll find it happens mostly in the cities. Or it is reported mostly in the cities. Whatever else it is.

My question is, an IIT pass-out... But do you know something about a dowry rate chart? Do you know a rate chart? There's something called a dowry rate chart. Okay, let's do this exercise. Can everybody type in their Google or Claude, "What can I expect as a dowry if I'm an IIT Bombay pass-out, followed by an IIM Ahmedabad MBA degree?" Currently, I... Tell me the story, okay? Currently, I am placed or I'm employed as a vice president in London for JP Morgan. I want the bride from... No, let's just stop at JP Morgan. Come back. Right? Enter and see what you find.

Did you find something? It's illegal. It's fine. Can you put the location? IIT. You can just look up the IIT and handwritten money side also. Yeah, but they don't talk about dowry. That's the point. No, I mean, it's fine. So, he said 4,000. Just change the category if you can. From IIT, IIM, can you make that person an IAS provisional officer? He did an IIT and he went to civil service and he's a provisional officer in Lavasa, or, say, IAS officer. Why are you doing this? It's exactly like gender, it's fine. Let's go back.

That's the weight exchange? 150? No, but that does not work. So, the app doesn't work because it's a particular account that's part of the process. It's fine, it's here. Provided the income is still more than 5 CR. No, that's not going to happen.

So now, where your technology is failing us, your technology is taking only one kind of variable: that's economic capital. There is another category called social capital. That is how much of a network value you hold. Who do you know? I am supposed to know all the cabinet secretaries, the ministers, the businessmen. The network value of an IAS officer is huge. That is why they are going to earn very close to what you're predicting, around 5 CR as well.

Now, coming back to the example that I have got, people say, is I need to graduate in computer science if he does nothing after this. This is his degree, he's going to get into a job. If he gets married just after his graduation, where his salary is parked around, let's say, 65 lakhs a year, he's supposed to earn around this year.

This is in certain states of India. I don't know about Delhi. I don't know how much of a job it is. So, this is Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana, Delhi. Just a particular area.

Now, this rate keeps on increasing as soon as you keep on accumulating degrees or you go up the ladder. That's why the prime time to catch a groom is just after graduation. The rate is at its lowest. The bar is going to just increase with this person going up in the social ladder.

Now think about it. Falling in love at first sight. Marriage is a meaningful act, and it's for seven lives. All these terminologies or proverbial things exist with this sign of a contract. And both of them coexist at the same time.

This is what social anthropology is all about. It tries to unpack a social phenomenon or problem to say it is very complicated. That's why when you're working on this, we also have to talk individually about the problem that is there. And what do we do with it?

The expectation is you'll take media articles and literature. I'm going to help you find literature. Don't worry about that. And you're going to write an essay of 3,000 words stating how convoluted, how filled with contradiction and complexity this social problem is.

And why are we doing this? We're doing this exercise, not a sociology course only, because when a friend of yours, a CS friend of yours, comes and says, there is poverty, I have to create a poverty ladder. It exactly is that reversal app that he's talking about. What are you planning? Do you understand the nuance of poverty? Where does poverty come from? What is poverty? Is it just people not having money? Or is it people not having opportunity? Or is it people not having networks? Everything is like poverty. All of them are types of poverty, and they amplify the scale of becoming poverty. This is something that I want as an exercise.

Now, why are we doing this? With this, the first thing I want you to know, there are two things that you all did. To answer my question, the first thing was when he started saying, he stated it as an opinion, that he needs an entry. He's not sure that much, but he thinks it might be his opinion. What he was saying is opinion. That's a kind of a data that we avoid as a student. We have opinions about everything. That's fine. That might be the first cue when it comes up with, but that cannot be your code of experimentation or inquiry.

Second, someone said heard opinion. She said, "I've heard." You use the word "heard," and she said in a summer heard. This is a second opinion. I've heard from people saying, I saw something, I read an article. It's second opinion. But when I say that I've done, I've met people who are seeking this rate chart, for me, it's a kind of a data that I've done.

So, for this exercise, one thing that we'll avoid is this one: talking about opinions. You can start with an opinion, great, but start with an opinion if it has changed. Not completely transformed, you are right, but a hunch. But how did this exercise change that opinion? Then it's fine. Otherwise, we shouldn't start with an opinion.

The other were the social phenomena. This is a social phenomenon. An example of a social phenomenon is this. A social phenomenon is ID preference. The people who like to do engineering in the ID field is a social phenomenon. Sometimes, phenomena are also problems. Sometimes, phenomena are not problems. For example, another social phenomenon which is not a social problem is the concept of intimacy or love. I write intimacy or... But there are aspects of intimacy and love which might be a social problem.

For example, the entire incel culture. How many of you know about the incel culture? What is an incel culture? How many of you have murdered this guy called Andrew Tate? Andrew Tate. You have not discovered anything.

Now, this guy is an influencer. He's an absolute influencer. What he tries to preach is that as a man, you have to always act that you are very hard to get. You have to be this very exotic, aloof kind of a category of a person when you gain the attraction of women. Fine. Maybe that's a performance. Great.

The problem in power is there are stages to be this man which is difficult. How many of you watch this series called Adolescence? If you think that you can expect a lot of mental anxiety and trauma if you watch this, but if you think you want to go through that path, you should watch Adolescence.

Adolescence is the story of a class 7 boy in Dublin, in Scotland, who has killed his classmate. It's a shame. And the police are basically trying to find out whether they're killed or not. That's the entire Adolescence case.

What comes out of the series is that this entire incel culture is nothing but young people, men, turning very toxic. And the term of sociology is called toxic masculinity. That's something within this love and intimacy, ordinary, which is problematic.

So, you pick up something like this and you write the book. That's the idea. We'll talk more about how to do it, what are the sections, and what is expected. I just wanted to give you an introduction so that you can think about it or work out a content for yourself.

What is going to help you is Siddharth is going to send—you know, a lot of people will be late—he's going to send a book to you. I hope he's sent it. Send it across. Look into the chapters of the book. You don't have to read all the chapters. There's sociology of work, sociology of professions, sociology of religion, political sociology. I don't know whether there's sociology of intimacy, but that's also a field within this. Pick one of them. And it will help you to think. When you're picking, don't think about whether I'm going to get good marks or not. Everything can be sociology. Pick something that interests you. All research problems, whether it's now or when you're working with us in our department, make sure that you have an interest in it. Otherwise, in one year, you're going to see how the class people just escape. So please be interested and curious about the problem. So select something like that.

Now, coming back to the question of Ketan Mayo's conversation. So Ketan Mayo is a British national who comes to India in her 30s. And she is here, and she sees the East as a very exotic place. By the way, when I'm speaking, if you want some character, you should stop me and ask questions.

So Ketan Mayo finds India to be very exotic. And she comes here. And she goes around the streets of India, and she writes that India itself is one of the worst places to be in the world. It doesn't have civilization. It doesn't have democracy. The streets are dirty. People are filthy and smelly. The food is the worst that somebody can have. And she writes a book. And that book's from her book.

Now, when Gandhi's here—you all know Gandhi, yes? No?—when Gandhi sees this book, he says that if you ask a train inspector to write about India, they would have written something similar. What does this mean? Pass it behind me. The jacket is... What does Gandhi's book mean? What do you think? What does it mean by saying this?

And rain, rain, rain. We are completely disconnected. You don't know? Yes, you still do.

I think what you mean is that there was only one aspect of India, and she only saw it through a very biased angle. Because she had a very high expectation of India. The exotic thing, she saw it when she was not there. And then she came to the exotic part of what she didn't like, which is not a bad part.

Exactly. So if you came here to find trash, you will find trash. Again, it's also what you're saying; it's a very valid perspective. India and its condition is not a natural... At that point of time, and even today, India or any geopolitical territory or any space for search is in that condition, not because there is something innate, genetically wrong with those people. It's a consequence of so many years of colonisation. It's a consequence of the type of...

From ancient... Again, the other thing that you always said in today's WhatsApp University is all the problems started in two places. One is the Mughal Centre, and India was the worst place to be. Second is the British Centre, who made it much worse. It's completely wrong. Because if you think about ancient India and the history of ancient India, wars were very common. And wars between Hindu rulers, Hindu-Buddhist rulers, both these Islamic rulers—it's just wars and wars in ancient India. It's not a peaceful place. This peace came to almost the penultimate or the ultimate stage; the climax is the British rule. And we are suffering, right? That is where this woman enters and says the conditions are very bad.

Just think about it that... Let's say the... You have heard about that in India, especially in Gujarat, there has been a history of plagues in ancient India, in medieval India, and colonial India. Plagues is a disease that happens because of rats. And it spreads to humankind. Humankind do not have the type of immunity to survive it; they die. And it's just like a pandemic. So if you are entering Surat in the middle of a pandemic and saying, well, things are done, people are dying everywhere, people are... What is the reason for that? The reason is people can't even think of health and hygiene because they are expected to work 16 hours for a colonial dispensation. You don't have money to think about hygiene and health. Some people don't. Most of the society is completely down for it. They do not have the human life.

So Catherine Mayer enters at that point of time. So the question is, see, it's not understanding. So when he was talking about it, when he was speaking about the Tamil, when he heard something, he doesn't have understood the problem. He should have said, "I have heard this."

I have seen this post. You are reporting a second-hand account rather than saying, “Well, I know the fact.” That is where misinformation is created. When you transform what you have heard or read into “I know,” that's the problem. You know, when you try to investigate it, with what you have investigated, you don't know the problem. You have seen. The seeing is not understanding.

So the experience here is, can everybody see this photograph of you? Okay, what's happening here? This is my question. People are starving. When a lot of people are starving in a place, what is that called? Yes, it's a famine. But I am not saying it's a photograph of a family. Anything other than family. A lot of children. Two visible probable parents compared to the five children, six children.

So now I am stating my advice: seeing is not understanding. Let me describe the photograph. So it has mixed demographics. Can I say that? Great. Anything else? I am just eating food. Can you say that? You can't say that.

Catherine may only saw one aspect of India and only saw it through a very biased angle because she had a very high expectation of India. The exotic thing, she saw it when she was not there. And then she came to the exotic part of what she didn't like, which is not a bad part. Exactly. So if you came here to find trash, you will find trash. It's also what you are saying. It's a very valid perspective.

India and its condition is not a natural... At that point of time, and even today, India or any geopolitical territory or any space for search is in that condition not because there is something innate, genetically wrong with those people. It's a consequence of so many years of colonization. It's a consequence of the type of...

Again, the other thing that you always said in today's WhatsApp University is all the problems started in two places. One is the Mughal center, and India became the worst place to be. Second is the British center, who made it much worse. It's completely wrong. Because if you think about ancient India and the history of ancient India, wars were very common. And wars between Hindu rulers, Hindu-Buddhist rulers, both these Islamic rulers, it's just wars and wars in ancient India. It's not a peaceful place. This peace came to almost the penultimate or the ultimate stage, the climax is the British rule. And we are suffering. That is where this woman enters and says the conditions are very bad.

Just think about it. Let's say you have heard about that in India, especially in Gujarat, there has been a history of plagues in ancient India, in medieval India, and colonial India. Plague is a disease that happens because of rats. And it spreads to humankind. Humankind do not have the type of immunity to survive it. They die. And it's just like a pandemic.

So if you're entering Surat in the middle of a pandemic and saying, “Well, things are done. People are dying everywhere. People are...” What is the reason for that? The reason is people can't even think of health and hygiene because they're expected to work 16 hours for a colonial dispensation. You don't have money to think about hygiene and health. Some people do. Most of the society is completely down for it. They do not have dignity in life. So Catherine Mayer enters at that point of time.

They seem malnourished, and they seem to be outside. So they don't have food, they don't have a home. Great. Next photograph. What is happening here? An anorexic model. What is she doing? She's playing art. Can you be louder? Could you say that? It's also about a photograph. And here you say something similar. Yeah, same thing. Photograph, yeah, okay. Now what's happening here? People find this. She's starving for revolution.

I think the Indian teachers' protest has an impression on her. Anything else? So she's saying she's on a hunger strike. That's what she's saying. Anything else? The person on the right is. What do you think is happening? She's feeling really lonely and sad. Anything else?

Now, famine disorder. It's a photograph of famine. Which famine? Yes, the Bengal famine, '39. What happened in the Bengal famine? Why is it so famous? World War II was going on, and the British used to control the world. And despite the evil being, the highest rate of the famine was in the British. It was one of the biggest.

It's repeating songs and the visual imagery of Bengalis. This is before Partition, so when I say Bengalis, I mean both East Pakistan, Bangladesh, and West Bengal, both. It's "Ma Fannes, the Fannes, Ma Fannes," which means, "Please give me the rice water, the rice broth." So if you boil the rice, there's water that will be there, right? "Please don't throw it out. Give it in my glass," because that's—I’m begging for that water, not rice. And it became a very powerful voice and image in the biographical records.

But, you know, even I have heard people say this in my childhood, that I was a small child, and I used to hear women and men on the streets shouting the slogan, "Ma Fannes, the Fannes," the rice water.

Now, going forward, this person—yes, she is an anorexic person. Okay, now someone can introduce this word. What is anorexic? What does anorexia mean? It's a condition where you starve yourself to look leaner, and food sort of repels—you repel food, and you... It's a condition in which people are not happy with their body. They just starve themselves so much, and the idea here is that by being anorexic, you're going to be very—you have—you will be with a feeling to the camera.

This all came in 2009–10, this entire idea of unproud thin bodies, okay? So in India, it is being practiced. So you all know Kareena Kapoor. You've heard about Kareena Kapoor. She is an actress. Exactly, that's the place where she describes, "I actually was trying anorexia," to be anorexic, because almost that was the Western gaze: women have to be like this to be beautiful.

Now what it does is, it basically homogenizes or flattens the idea that people can be of different shapes, sizes, and colors. We all want everybody to be the same because it's a cultural movement. It affects you.

Now, this photograph, the next one, she literally is on a hunger strike, but her hunger strike is not for revolution, not to free the masses. Her hunger strike is because she wants to go to heaven. This is a Jain tradition called Sadhpara, where you want to reach heaven. You struggle through fasting, and you die out of starvation. You reach heaven.

What's common between these few photographs? What is it? People who are starving. People starving, and people who are malnourished.

What changed after we had the discussion? What's obvious? The photographs were different. What we see is different in the photographs. What's the other thing that happened when we were speaking? The context. The context.

Seeing or hearing doesn't tell you anything about the context. When we move from there to understanding, we are interested about the context, so we can do this for the context. Educational, let's say, this idea of paper leaks, where the question is important, right? What's the context of paper leaks? Why are papers so important in a country? Why is I, E, J, E, meet, clap so important in this country? What happens if I don't have a good family? All those things are part of the context.

So you go on questioning the context with the investigative community. If you don't have a good context, you don't have a good result for it. And sociology tries to basically say that context is as important as the context.

So, first question: taking for granted stuff, and it's not practice, not an attempt to understand. So this adds up to this book. He says that you practice something called the art of skepticism.

Now I have an exercise for all of you. Find a statement in your life. You don't need to include all this. Or what you thought was common sense, and you realize that it was a lie or just something else.

For me, a very common-sensical thing that stayed with me till class 10 was that women are weird. They are not like us. In class 10, I was in an all-boys school. Until class 10, for us, literally, we saw a lot of our age bracket. So we could only talk to women if they were our mothers.

Before that, it was—so I really understand this instant culture. It's not a product of Gen Z. It has roots in our culture. So for me, it was, "Women are weird and men are not like us." I'm sure women also have very similar views.

Now, something—I'm not telling you how that got investigated and got broken. Think about something like that, because I'm with you.

Something that is important to you over and over again, and you are—today I want to talk about it. No, that's not true. Is that true? There's a question mark. There's skepticism. Wait. Take five minutes to think about it. A minute is still trying to find. One clue that I can give you, just to kick off your memory, if you have just forgotten, right? Think about the perception you had of Cook Light when you came in and that's got broken now. So many films, I'm sure. From back to good, from good to bad, from good to not sure. This recent history is not even the childhood.

Let's start. Can we start from the extreme left? Yes. The ultimate asset for a woman is her family and children. It's a statement. It's not a question. The ultimate asset for a woman is her children and family. What's her name? Can you just step back? It's not a cross. If you're questioning, people are questioning. Children and family. Okay, great. People say that from high school, the more exam, their life is sorted. It's an easy way. Life is easy as a game. As a game. Some people say it's a five-one-one. Somebody else can comment. Okay, you. It's a question mark. Go to the next person. This is not right. Basically, how I reason out how college is like a scary place where seniors want money. It's a scary place. College is a scary place.

So the conclusion of when a child is young, how they act, how they behave in a social gathering is a direct reflection of their parents' upbringing. So a lot of times, the parents tend to tell them that if you act a certain way, then this shows that you are in a position to act. I feel like that isn't really true. Or it's questionable.

Respect has layers, for example. Respect has something called discipline and obedience attached to it.

Can I actually say that you're being indisciplined if I don't understand that generation? For example, I'll tell you an example of me being a teacher. I was a student just three years back in a preschool. So the last bench of most of my classes, those two benches, there are people on their phones throughout my classes. How can I react to this? I actually don't expect respect, but I am expecting a bit of attention. Because you will come and cry after I give you the example for sure, right? But the matter of fact is now I understand that some people, most of us, are so attuned to the idea of escaping into our phone is difficult. It's not obvious that those people are very mischievous and they're naughty. The fact that I need to stay without my phone and concentrate here is very difficult.

So when you're demanding respect, can it be just out of...? For example, the country we stay in. Maybe they will always respect you because you're very helpful. They've been kind to you once, right? That's what I'm saying. See, if people are not close to you, they will not ever respect you as the other people. Because behind your back, there's something else. So they respect you if they're close to you. And only that's the respect that you don't really want to have a relationship with. What's the point of having, like, I don't want to name the person, but what's the point of having a billion people respecting you but custom when you turn your back? There's no point in that.

Now, what happened is with my socialization, I have realized, okay, women like theatre as much as I did. Second, they had very similar academic problems that women had in life. Third, they spoke a language which was the same as ours. I thought that they spoke Hindi, I spoke Bangla. We were speaking the same language of that generation. All this happened because there was an exposure which was of socialization.

Let's pick up one point from here to discuss this. Where was that? Okay, the ultimate asset for a woman is child, children, and family. Okay, first of all, why is the statement problematic? Who said that? Why is the statement problematic? Because the statement is one-sided and unfair. Actually, that's very problematic if you say that for everybody, whether it be men, women, and gender others, children and families, and families should be their ultimate asset. Would you agree? No, no, I'm asking the men. Would you agree that your children and your family are...? I'm not even sure that I'm going to marry or have a child. Not the ultimate asset. Definitely an important part.

She said ultimate asset. Before that, is viewing them as assets even...? I don't know if it's her phrasing or the viewing, but is viewing them as assets even...? We just discussed dowry, where men, child are thought as assets. We don't... I don't believe in that either, so I'm questioning this. So again, let's assume that doesn't... So again, the opinion will not matter because dowry is happening. I'm going to exchange the child for a child, a man. So definitely there's an asset question.

So the question is that family and children are important, or other assets. And why are we linked to women? What's the justification behind this? The dependence.

The dependence? The entire thing is called reproduction. Not only biological. Women are supposed to reduce the family, sustain the family by producing unpaid work. The moment a woman comes out of today's generation or the previous generation, in fact, they started working. Exactly. This is what was in question.

Now that women are out, and very interestingly, our first cabinet that became... The first parliament recessions between the border, it's called the Hindu Women's Bill. The bill was contesting whether women have the right to pay inheritance. Are they able to inherit anything from their parents or from their husbands? It has to pass through a male heir.

When this was being discussed, very learned scholars just came on with stats. I just know one or two of them. These are not common people at that point of time. They just said one thing: if you give women the right to work and the right to inherit, they are going to go astray. They are going to become as loose in character as that of the Western women.

So what does that mean? As if this is what holds the period. Now the question is, if you think about caste-based violence, gender-based violence in India, women suffered the most. It's data. Two sections of data. The question here is, what is happening? Why is the woman's body the site of any kind of hegemony or show of power?

Because our ultimate asset for a woman is the child, children, and the family. The other statement linked to this with a lot of women in our country is they are the repository of family's honour. So when there's a caste-based violence, religious violence, or violence of any kind, attack the woman. It's just not about sexual depravity that I'm talking about. It's about that I'm striking your honour.

So at the heart of it, if you think of it as a sociological analysis, this is very problematic, but it requires the understanding that it's coming from. You're striking it down, great, right? But where did this come from? It's an interesting question. What led to this statement coming into use? And it's very common. When I come from Rajasthan, I have to go to Calcutta, it's very similar to Rajasthan.

Now, when Bhagat talks about the sociological attitude, when he's saying all these things, he's saying that we should have a value-free and intellectual feeling for controlling biases. So, I would agree with him completely. Because as a woman, when Akanksha states this statement, I don't know how she could rate that bias. How can she do it? She could not herself. How can I then say, when somebody's saying that I live a marked relationship, very common statement in the last few months, if I speak Bangla, a random person will say I live a marked relationship, it's very common.

Not in Hyderabad, it's about great, but in other parts of the world, my friends have faced this, in other places, people have faced this, because there's a meta idea of Bangla's human beings. So, it's almost, in Hindi it's called a kanch, or it's sort of like a criticism, or that kind of a statement, that kind of a argument.

How can I be value-free when I have a mother? Right? Or value-free, as they call it. So, it depends on the question. If that is the statement she's putting forward, it would be difficult for her to be value-free. But let's say if the question for her is, I, the education Indian, computer science education Indian, can be value-free? Or maybe she can't, because she's from a CST background.

This is in social science, what we call being reflexive. When it's upright, state your biases. If you can't state your biases, at least state who you are, your position. So, when I'm writing, I feel that I actually visited households of the workers to have a discussion, but found it difficult to talk with the women of the household, like the wife of the worker, I state that this is a productive limitation of me being a man.

If today I want to go and speak to people of their community, they might not open up to me to that extent that they would open up to somebody from their community to do the research, because I pass off as an heterosexual man. So, all these things needs to be actually kept into mind when you do this.

My question is, then, think about this in a broad aspect now: is engineering or STEM fields truly objective? Are they valuable? When somebody is coding a payment gateway, you know what a payment gateway is? You all wish to have payment gateways. Is it a neutral exercise? Is it an objective exercise?

Objective in what sense? Objective in the sense that there is nothing in me that is affecting the process of creating that payment gateway. Me being a man doesn't affect it, me being married doesn't affect it, me being upper class doesn't affect it.

None of the characteristics I have in the demographics, ascribed or achieved roles, as well as notions, affect the process of coding. What does affect the process of coding? It affects...

The person who coded it is from an unknown background. Who was the person? I'm the person. Who's coding? I don't know. I'm saying the person who wrote it for some purpose, that exercise itself is value-free and neutral. Is it value-free and neutral? That's my question.

In terms of accessibility, it may not be. Forget about that. One thing is that accessibility, the coding itself, you're saying. Now that you're sitting here, you have access. Not that. Accessibility to the user itself. Great. But that is not in my hand. I cannot make it. For example, a product is given in Bombay. Accessibility is multiple things. Access to the home.

Why do you think about disability and accessibility? It's a great question. If you think about my product being launched in Delhi and not in Hyderabad, it's not in my hand. Sure. Now you put that as a question. Am I keeping a person with a difference in mind? Exactly. There can be so many.

I'll just tell you one thing. There were some reports. This statement was said by a very famous person at an Indian conference. It was Bill Gates or one of those tech persons. He said that when I went into a company and started working, somebody saw my lousy coding and said that you code like a woman.

"Code like a woman"—that was the statement. Now he's like, "I don't believe in this." My question is, you code like a woman, what does it mean? It's a neutral job, right? Either you code correctly, or you code incorrectly. There's a wrong there. What does coding like a woman mean? It means nothing, right? All those ideas build up, the biases build up.

One of the very important parts is, there's a patient recognition code, a scan code, built in one of the first universities. Whenever it saw a dark-skinned person, it couldn't recognize it as a human. It only recognized white men and women as humans. It said, "Unidentified object." You have trained your data on an all-white database. This is one of the older examples. I'm sure new examples are there now, where you see this kind of biases come in.

Payment gateways. When UPI and ABCI was launched, a lot of research happened in Hyderabad. The first problem that people had was that they had no understanding about where the money is going from, how is it getting connected. Because there was no education. People were like, "You send the money, where did the money go? How do you check that?" All the English. Now it's different languages. Smartphone was not accessible. So you coded, you brought in a product which only made sense for somebody who understood English and had access to a smartphone, and access to banking. So you have an entire jam background. We can actually question where people say it's a value-neutral world. It doesn't have any bias.

So the other thing is that with sociological features, is to be a good spy. Here, what I mean by spy means that you need to look sometimes behind the curtain. So a lot of sociologists work on what is known as crime and deviance.

So suppose you go to prisons, access those prisons, and talk to people. Then what they found out was that prisoners want to be free, right? They don't want to go to jail. So the option was given to prisoners. And the option that was given to them was that if you were to change something about this prison system, what would you do? What do you think the prisoners said?

They will have no guards or doors.

Anything else? They want smartphones? Maybe more access. Outward access. How many of you have seen a jail? Not from inside, outside. Have you seen a jail from inside? Central jail. You have seen a jail? I can't pass by.

How many of you have seen a police station from inside? From inside. A lot of you, right? You all see. Now, my question is, with law enforcement agencies, anything else, by the way? What will the prisoners have asked for?

Better food. Better food? Yeah, better food. Mobile phones, access to others.

So they said all of this, but in what is called a state form. None of them said that I want to be free. My jail sentence should be reduced. They said, "I want a fair hearing. I want closer dates for my court." As you know, the Indian legal system, you have something in March, then it's like August. The next time the court hears you. They want a division system. Yes, they want all of those things. They're saying non-smartphones.

So what we see is, the first idea is that criminals want to be free and a lesser sentence that was given to them. They wanted a better structure. This can be only done if you believe that there is nothing called a profane realm when it comes to sociology.

What does profane mean? What is profane?

Inherently bad or evil. Inherently bad or evil.

What is the antonym for profane?

Sacred.

Sacred, yes.

So for a sociologist, you cannot have a distinction between the sacred and the profane. If you feel like investigating... So at one point, I wanted to investigate the bowels of Bengal. You know what bowels are? You know what's a bowel culture? So Bauls are basically folk singers who go out in the villages with a very small string instrument called dotara, and they sing. They are outcasts. So they have said that we don't belong to any religion or any caste. We belong to God, and we sing. So I wanted to research that.

The moment I told this to my father, this is me in PhD. So my father said, "What do you plan to work on?" I said, "I plan to work in Bengal itself, and on this thing." My father said, "This is very dangerous." I said, "Why?" My father said, "They smoke marijuana from morning six to night." "So?" I said, "No, it's very dangerous, right? They smoke marijuana. They're dangerous people." As a sociologist, this is something that should affect your research. But there are things that could affect you.

For example, I just entered this incident that in my fieldwork, I was working with the gig workers. So you go to work on a mobile. One of them had a birthday party, and they invited me to this restaurant. It was a restaurant and bar. It was called Saki Bar, S-A-K-I Bar. And I went there without knowing anything.

So this person comes out and receives me. Now, this is not quite a posh area, a posh bar. But I went there because they are my respondents. I have to go there. And the last thing I see, I enter it. It's a dimly lit, dingy bar. How many of you have seen Delhi? Have you seen this movie called Dev.D? A great movie, by the way, on Jekyll, if you want to watch it. Are you all aware of it?

So in this dimly lit, neon-lighted kind of a space, in front of me as I enter, the left side is the bar counter, the right side is the stage, which has rails on it, and there will be women dancing. It's a dancing bar.

What happens after that? It's my middle-class morality. It's completely shaking. I'm like, "What do I do? I never see something like this." I call up my supervisor. I'm like, "I'm here, this people. It's important for me to be here because they're my friends, and I need to talk to them about their lives and data collection."

I support my supervisor. "If you are feeling unsafe, just move out of the bar. It's not worth it. It's okay. Maybe tomorrow you would have research interest in how dance bars function. You have a problem, right?"

So Mumbai had actually a dance bar union and something like that. They have so many dance bars. And there was a union fighting for their rights. That was on some other work. Where do you work, the women, the workers? They didn't have a place to work. So that's something that's broken.

But there are researchers who have worked on it. There's a researcher called Ashley Niels. She was working in what is known as sex trade within the modeling industry. In Europe and the West, upcoming models who don't have connections but want to go up the ladder, they get paid for being in parties. That's it. You come to a party, you spend time there, have a drink, talk, you go.

So the question that Ashley asks: Why are those women in this room? What are they doing here? They are there to increase the glamour. That's what's being said: increase the value, the aesthetics of the party. They make you look posh. That's why they are being hired. And slowly, what we find in her work is that a lot of them get pushed into sex trade.

Now, Ashley, as a person, she acted as one of those women and did this research. Insane, it's very dangerous. But she was like, "I don't care." So that's that question of looking behind scenes without a waste of trust. A lot of sociologists of different genders have done that. And you literally peer in. Notice we'll talk about this when this work happens.

Okay, let's see. I hope all of you have the hidden book with you now. You don't have it? Just send it to me. When do you have the next class? Friday? So that homework, whatever it is, it has to be 100%, and you have to write me and Nisha a book to have the next class. We will collectively mail and cc ma'am. You can do that.

How are you? If I could talk about the computational part of our research, we are not going to do it in a class campus. We are going to do it on some kind of... Do you all have a class on Saturday morning? It's 11 to 11:30. The last class we have? So we'll do something after that. I'll write something. I'll send you a mail stating people who are interested. It's not a campus breakfast.
