We're still in the middle of the night. Consistent for me, many rounder. No, today they give, like, five pieces and start with you. If your question is, "Where did you study all these things from?" You have the hidden score control. Just go control app and just search for class function. There's another book that's uploaded, I guess. Raymond Darren, is it uploaded? So, in Volume One, the chapter on Karl Marx would also have these colours.

So that's it. We'll talk about this phenomenon of, on the question of alienation. I classed what is alienation and how are you seeing it being used in, ah, anything else? How do people use alienation as a new software for the good for patients? Like, we say that they are part of the other, and I don't think it's good matter. That's alienated. But that's against alienation.

Okay. Anything else that resonates, that you resonate with the leaderboard? What about this connection that people feel is selected from the web? They will, and everything will, yeah, that's not a commonplace thing. It's kind of the work also. So let's just try it. Walk, king, people, it's, to me, not just being different, but being different in a bad way, like the idea of being an alien. There's something wrong about it.

Yes, moderate anoscotle. Huh? Moderate anoscotle.

Now, all of this, what we said, is true. Alienation, or being alienated, comes with its own negative correlation to it. I don't think people would like it if they want to feed it. They say things like themselves, "I would like to be alienated." Rather, people might say things like, "I would rather live a solitary life." There's a difference in that. In one, somebody is saying that I want space; in the other, somebody is saying that I have been forcefully put aside. There's something—there's almost like an agency, as if somebody's pushing you out from somewhere.

So, for Marx, this entire presence that he writes on alienation is about what is happening in the capitalist economy. And then the question is, in feudal times, as we discussed in last class, was there alienation, or wasn't there alienation?

During feudal times, people were definitely alienated, and this alienation means mostly that, as a class of serfs serving through the lord, I do not have any agency over my life. My children don't have any agency. They can't do what they want to do. I can't do what I want to do. If this guy is going to sell this plot of land, I will be sold off. It's almost like a time-bound nature.

Interestingly, what happens in capitalism—I remember this last of you—interestingly, what happens in this entire matrix now is capitalism comes in. And capitalism promises—the first thing it promises—freedom from primitive shackles of feudalism. You're not going to tie for one place; you would have social mobility, you would have geographical mobility, and that also means that you would experience what we are discussing as freedom.

Marx is saying, even though capitalism is a progressive force in relation to feudal times, it still hampers freedom. And for Marx, it is the capitalist mode of production, the way goods come into being. For example, the way this duster came into being. Anybody who was involved in the process of creating this duster, those people's freedom, according to Marx, would also have been permitted.

Somebody who, among you, is the whole, let's say, work in Mecca, even though you would have 17 types of coffee, that machine—Marx would argue there is still a constricted sense of freedom of thought. Because according to Marx, a human being's greatest gift is creativity. And to express that creativity, the production process within capitalism actually, basically, according to him, throttles it, chokes it for death.

For Marx, an ideal human life has three—ideal human life in a day has three components to it: etas, etas, and etas. Etas of work, etas of rest, and etas of us being us, doing what we want to do, what we love to do. That might be.

So it's very interesting now to think about the question from identity. When we lived in the world, we were able to do that through good times. Even in India, what was the relationship like? It's different from you.

So imagine an Indian village. There would be somebody who would be the landholding castes. Who owned most of the lands? It varied. It's not that in some places it's going to be vestras. For the Valda system, the people were businessmen. Thus, Brahman castes sometimes own land, Rashmus might own the land, Nayairs might own land in Kerala, right? They're eating from, well, my own land.

The question is, them or is there a dominant us? Mostly within the Chuckabird system only. Talets or talents or untouchables never own land. We even have Shutra caste people owning land and being dominant caste and also being rulers of dynasty.

Now, the caste that owns that land becomes the landowning caste. So this is, let's say, at the center of the village.

Around this is situated the village economy. Because the village economy is agriculture. That's the center of everything. You would have somebody coming and providing the tools of agriculture. A coppersmith would be one, the blacksmith would be the other, and there would be a carpenter who would be another person necessary.

Now, with agriculture's associated branch, agriculture doesn't only mean cultivation. It also means layering of animals. That falls under livestock. Cows, goats, sheep—everything falls under livestock.

So there would again be people who would want to take care, let's say, of those animals. None of them are from the land of the trust. What you have done is a division of labour. These are the caste identities. The capitalist system challenges this entire idea in capital.

Now, say that this animal dies. Somebody has to take the animal from the shed of that feudal lord away. Who will do that? It's going to be Padana who is going to do that.

So, in the idealistic way, when people have described an Indian village economy, they have said, “Well, it's such a beautiful system of altruism. Everybody has a role to play, thus the structure exists.” But what is inherent, what is at the heart of it, is that a person who actually takes care of the dead cow and carcass can never own land, can never have their children get an education. It's a system of exploitation through which a certain kind of synergy was being maintained across India, except for very few states. The Northeast was a bit different, and then Kashmir was a bit different in that country.

Now, what capitalism does is come and hit this and tell us, “In a capitalist market, we don't care about your caste identity.” And capitalism doesn't matter. What matters is your merit. That's why we call it the meritocratic society.

Now we move from here to the idea of another kind of identity, which is based on merit. That's why, whenever I would ask someone, after a few years, a random person comes and asks you who you are, they first say your name. Second, the only internal thing that comes out is, “I'm an engineer.” I'll say, “I'm an academic.” So after my name, the first thing that comes out of me, which proves my benefit in society, is my job description and what else trained in it.

Something that still continues there: caste identities or names were attached to professions. Even today, it's the same. Just that the promise here is that we would be able to move up the ladder if we have enough. Thus, we have freedom.

If I lock us all in, if I tell you that, okay, today you are at this class of people and engineers, and any one of you loves music or plays music, wants to play music—I don't know, someone might have some subtle ideas that I would want to pass you to, let's say, journalism, or be a bureaucrat—if we all lock you out and say, “No, it can't be. You would be engineers for your life, and you would serve this company,” you'll be going back to a family.

The freedom that you have is that you can move out and in. That is the right to access the Shiny Model. But what is the problem with this? The problem is in that meritocratic society, in that meritocratic scale that's been talked about, when Marx says eight hours of work, eight hours of leisure—what he calls leisure, but it's basically what we love to do—and eight hours of rest, most of us in that eight hours of leisure would also work.

We attach self-worth to how valuable our inputs are to industry. Our self-worth assessment is about how important I am to III P. Am I being able to draw value from that? I really love watching movies. I love to make cinema. Generally, it's very difficult for me. So work almost takes the part or replaces the idea that there is any other form of identities possible. Identities that we have from work—these are the center of it.

Thus, the question is: what happens to freedom? And Marx is asking me this question: what happens to freedom when work becomes the essential life and your identity? And you still have the promise of freedom.

So capitalism at its heart starts with the Industrial Revolution. But by the time the 1930s come into being, and Marx had seen this already in its title, after full-fledged mechanized work, which had humans working on machines, it looked something like this.

Let's say that the duster is my product. The product is a lot of—so something has to come along. What are the things? You want raw materials. You need laborers. What else do you need? You need capital, money to do this work. You need land to set up this factory. You also require technology. At that time, whatever technology is required to produce this chunk of food.

So Henry Ford, who is the founder of Ford Motors, and also known as one of the biggest innovators of his time, was in Chicago and went into a meat-processing industry. It was an industry; it was basically a family running the thing. So what they had was the outhouse.

Weather, and this means this is a beef industry. So he sees the cows come in, the buffs come in there, the buffs get what they call stunned there. Stunned is the word that's produced, and then the buff is cleaned in a certain other place. The meat is brought, it's cut according to its parts, it's packaged, and it's took into the front store where consumption happens.

The first thing that hit Henry Ford, then one person doesn't need to be skilled from stunning to the packaging. So now, this table here, a worker in the world doesn't need to know how to make a table from the scratch. So it's not good.

How many of you can, right now, if I give you, if I break open this component, let's say a CPU, I break it over in front of us, how many of you will be able to assemble that entire PCP? Any PCP? It's a dexter. I'll open up the entire stuff. You can't see your mobile, you can't see your UCU, you can't take help from anything. How many of you will this class person with an entire thing? A dexter.

What is this? I keep the real one because everything is different. But all the other technique, every one of them might be different. Yeah, they have different specifications and things like that.

Which processor did you start from in your childhood?

I remember that we had a laptop which was a4I3.

So your time starts with 4i3, mine starts with something, but Pentium 4.

Yeah. Three and four, okay. Okay. So, as a very basic model, it's not a giving PC, right? How many will be able to accept that right now? Teachers who are able to do it?

The question then is that, in that's what Ford realized, a person who works in that field doesn't need to know the entire process. And it's a great revolution. Why? Because stages are not near, right?

Sure. Akangsha, all of these people can just work on the front end. And here, front end means not the front of the office; it means in front of the screen, like we used to do. Is it very important for him to know how this is working? Maybe not.

What you do then is again, which was there and entails some way, a division of neighbourhood. Break that entire process of duster making into small components. There is one person—forget about the duster because it doesn't have small components. If you take the cable, there is one person who is just screwing a single screw here, let's say. He's just putting one screw and tightening it. He's just putting, underscore, tightening.

How many people know what IKEA is? Most of you. IKEA is basically a furnishing company which says that it's a DIY, do it yourself. You bring stuff in, they will have a manual there. It's just like a jigsaw button puzzle; you can do it, basically put things together. But what do you do? You basically screw stuff together.

Like in childhood, I used to put sellotates and create certain kind of draft out of it. We are just doing that. I am not cutting the paper, you know. The paper is also cutting. It's just one part of that entire matrix that has been given to the consumer to have fun with it.

So this entire process of table making today would mean that wood does—it's cleaned here, it goes here, gets cut here. Somebody else at the same point tells this parallel line, working on the steel that's out there. Somebody else would be working on preparing the paint out there. The line is working, and by after a certain point, when we come here, all of these things would come together; we would have a table.

This entire distribution is:

1. A
2. B
3. D
4. C
5. B
6. B
7. D
8. F

I have broken that entire process, and I have one person standing at each level. If I need more people, I can be there, only four people. Last step: F. There are only four people.

What will you essentially do? Essentially, what we did, what Ford did, increased efficiency over thousandfold. A single person was not able to reach one table in a day—two to three days. A factory produces a thousand tools because we don't take down the system. Also, there's mechanization that's selling universal production.

But even if we were, let's say that there were five to ten carpenters, the city of the United that we had at our disposal, even we would ask them to work in this way. It's so common sense for them. Why don't you only prepare this product? Why don't these two people do the other product? You'll be producing more materials because, and you have a sink.

That scene is called rationalism, rationalization, where everybody produces similar kind of things in similar pattern.

What does it kill? What does it hinder? You only created it.

When you think about the ideal question of design, whether it be furniture or whether it be computer programmers, if there's a notion of design anywhere, it can only come if somebody is tinkering with it throughout. Otherwise, all designs are very superficial.

If I were to design, let's say, a motif for likely with symbolizers, computing and ICDs, I really need to understand this material I've been working with.

Let's say I have not, because I don't have any skills with cartoonry or with any kind of painting, sculpture, avoiding what all these things. Let's say I want to do something with the visual arts video. I need to understand: what is this video? Where are the videos coming from? Is it dance? Is it music? What kind of music? What kind of kangars? What does a sal signify in human history and cultural history?

All this means that a person needs to be extremely careful and creative. What are the three things that when he came into this college he ready to wrote him? There are three C's, right? I can't really tell you. Caring, competence, and caring. Creative, if you are. So just think about that part of it a bit. Competence, yes, because it really fits into the question of merit. You will become very important. Caring is of value, which some people might choose to have in today's time. I don't think there's anything inherent in people to say in today's time that everybody will be careful. Because there's one C that's missing there. What does the C stand for? There's three C's, either C's. What's the 4th C? Not C I over here. What's the 4th C?

The more you're reading competition, the question of care has to go around. The question here is that when you people are designing whatever on computer, or what we are interested in, music, whatever, the question is, you can only be creative if you knew the entire process like the target that only could make this entire thing for some. Otherwise, it will be supervision. And Marx would say, you will not derive as much enjoyment and creative measure at the superficial level. This is Marx seeing this again.

Now, my question is: the other thing that happened here is what? Deskilling. It's a term that a scholar called Ralph and Marxist. It's quite a deep spin. This other thing that is happening, which is linked to what today is known as data work, is called usurption of knowledge.

What is D cell? Deskilling is the idea that deskilling doesn't mean that I catch hold of Siddhant here and make him forget what he has done. That's not the process of deskilling. The process of deskilling is: how do I make subsequent generations realize that knowing how to make the entire table is not a part of your job? How do I make some of coders of tomorrow understand that, well, why would you need to learn coding the hard way? With Generative AI, a lot of pieces of coding can be done. There's a term that has come into this picture called why coding.

What you do with—what think about the Krishna works with doctors, one of my students, and he is basically seeing how doctors are using children data. And what they do is pretty interesting. What they are doing is doctors, and these are people with more than five years of experience. So, what they are doing right now, they are putting in a case to the Generative AI and they are saying, "What would be your diagnosis?" It is giving an answer. This guy is figuring, "But, well, you didn't consider this factor." It's having a conversation. And why is he doing—he or should he? She likes doing it because it's like a game to them. They're trying to one-up the AI chatbot. I'm thinking they are skilling themselves, so you'll remain with a cutting edge.

The problem here is that, on the other hand, you're training that model to do better doctors. Also, the problem is now in medical education, I don't know how many of your friends in medical colleges like you, they are using a lot of genetic ideology. So, what did what existed before education? Individuals, doctors were using Generative AI. What did they have? Now they're using Generative AI, right? Before this, there would be some place to which we used to get screened. What is that? If you have a difficult case, you used to send it in a WhatsApp group, used to call up people, and used to learn from them. It's what is known as an occupational community.

Today, before calling up somebody or messaging somebody about a difficulty, people would just use Generative AI for anything on this channel. What you have done is this is a process through which de-skilling happens of one thing, that is, of communication within an occupational company. It's a de-skill.

If you don't know, if let's say he talks in a different language or he understands things in a different way, he understands in a completely different way because we have been chatting with completely different kinds of Generative AI. How many people work with? How would people have any kind of standardized knowledge, specifically in the medical field? Medical field has to be standardized. It cannot be that she wants to treat somebody in the very aggregating way, I want to treat somebody in a very evaluating way. Want it to be to treat it in a very eloquent way. It cannot happen.

If that person has cancer, we have to go for a biopsy, we have to think about medication, chemo, and radiation. There is no other way to save this person.

But today people might just say that, oh well, there are these three ways. What is happening is the deskilling level here is a houseword.

Still, when these medical students would use it, every time they are stuck, they are not going to talk to them. And even if they talk to them, others will not also have the knowledge; they will rely on generic. Now, this is a very—the other thing is that you can say that this is far-fetched in the future, this doesn't happen, that's it. The question is on that.

This process was initiated for deskilling. That's what I'm doing. It might not be able to deskill somebody completely. But one of the inherent points at the start is I want to deskill workers. While it's a question, it could be because the capitalist industry wants them to remain superior to the workers. But why do I not want somebody to at least know how to make this table by themselves? What happened to the other piece of people? Then they won't work for me; they should start their own. That's just related to what he's saying.

There's an estimate question, a confidence question here. What else? They won't need you. They won't need to. They won't need you to ask that space to work in it, right? Deskill—no, it's not about that. So, what you are trying is that earlier they were morally, by birth, tied to a land. Today, what you are saying is that they are tied to the factory because there is no other work. And you would like to keep them discreet so that they cannot create an organization or a space of work for themselves.

That's not the point. The point here is, again, this is the ideal. What is capitalism's ideal? You want to replace the world. You want to start factories. China has a video—it's also a big about it now on YouTube—about a dark factory, which doesn't have a single person working. It doesn't have electricity; it just has sensors, and you can see there are robotic trolleys moving around and walking hands.

Now, how does this feed into that? For a capitalist understanding, according to capitalism, the most amount of money that they think gets wasted is in people and giving people wages. Nobody asks the question about technology. The technology is what? Fixed capital. I bring in a technology; that thing keeps on working on energy. I bring in a worker; that worker gets ill, the worker says, “After eight hours, I don't have anything to eat; I have to take a break.” The worker would come and say that, well, I need to go to a village; it's Diwali or it's Soni.

With human beings, what? Social realities and relations. Social realities where I can get killed, right? With machines, it's not workable. That's why the idea here is that I would rather invest in fixed capital, which is much more safe. It is also, in that sense, unsure of what the output would be. The three months, it's not. Today I am in a very good mood; I might work very well. Tomorrow I am not in the mood for something. Efficiency plan. It makes things calculable. Machines are easily—machines give you quantitative data. Human beings do not give you that quantitative data. It gives you an option, pretty much. Late, it would extend tomorrow.

That's why the entire idea of the shopping board—the idea of a managerial class—came into being. The managerial class's work is to make sure that every worker works as if they were your shields. Today, a council who produces can of those tables. If she doesn't produce, she doesn't go home. Or if she doesn't produce, she only gets half the money that she is due to what it is. A managing class is holding it. We are basically saying a human being is equivalent to a certain productivity.

The other question there is that consumption of knowledge in the same time process. Yeah, a few days back, there's a video that's going around on Instagram where you see people in the southern part of India, around Tamil Nadu's number. So there's stitching on the machine. Have you seen the stitching? So there is something people use; they basically move the leg as a lever and they move the cloth, and it stitches. All of these people had this kind of a banda that tennis players wear, and with a camera in it. It's a high-resolution camera. They were all variants. They look like—basically, they put—I thought it was almost like a very bad form of a Star Wars kind of a scenario that was there. White with cameras this way. And what a sound.

What is happening is that through the cameras, a model is learning how the human hand works. And these people have been at least given money or just said that you need to wear this and you want to work here. They have this. These people are creating a technology that replaces them and their future generations.

Interesting about clothes is, you know, handloom cloths. What is handloom by you? What is handloom and what is power loom?

Farming is mostly moonware-type work, and the person who's there is usually a family passed up the cap. They sit there and then move that they had it they wanted to do it.

But compared to that product station and everything is really closely as it, and the power editor there are something like that. Saying is very similar to how stitching happens in Belarus.

So in Bararas, what is to happen is that there is no electricity in the machine. So it's basically like a triangle. It looks like this; it's a triangle. The side beam is that it's this, and then there's a cable. So, cable again, you have another thing. This looks like this. On the front, you have basically the strings traveling from one side to the other side, like this, and you have what she's calling—it's called a patta in Hindi. So the threads will go through a certain kind of those holes in that patta, creating that design.

All the time, what the person is doing is controlling the mobility of the machine with the left hand. The right is moving the sari left and right. So whenever you move the sari, the design falls in different places. That's the idea of having this. This is handloom.

Power did this, where power came into being and that person didn't need to control that movement. The power didn't.

Today, what we have is computer-aided designs, in which there is a design that's fed to a printer kind of situation, and it directly gets printed in thread on Asadi, on cloth. In the process, what happens is a lot of people have lost jobs. Families would now move into other forms of sector rather than doing what they were historically. Intergenerational families who are into this business are moving out now.

The other very important thing that is happening is the skill of handing might be lost, but Vola, the capitalist economy understands this. What if they start doing how do you understand something is handled when it's nice? And something is not handled. You understand something is handled when it is not handled. Perfect.

You understand something is handloom when you turn the sari on the other side and you see that there are not some strings that are out there. In a machine-made sari, it would be flat. The strings would be perfect.

Human error is something that is valuable here. It means somebody needs their hands. What these machines are doing is not only capturing how it's done, but they're capturing the mistakes so that they can replicate the mistake to give a sense of what was known as false consciousness by Marx.

False consciousness means that when I consume something, I have no idea where it came from. For example, how many countries, or labor from how many countries, are required to produce one MacBook? Do you have any idea? For the creation of one MacBook, Blackbot. How many workers of different nationalities—not how many workers, how many nationalities get involved, workers of different nationalities? At least five. Is it five? Yes? Twenty-ish? Fifty-two. But the fact is, we don't need to know. What we need to know does.

You just basically need to know that it was designed in California. That's enough. This is false consciousness. When we don't know where it came from, how it got itself to it, it's basically as if, out of thin air, somebody would log something. It's a magic trick.

The other pretty thing about it is that we forget how we are related through our consumption, through what we consume, through what we do, with millions of people whom we don't know as a scientist. The one that I'm using is an old Samsung phone, but I'm sure there was somebody, a child in Congo, who was used in illegal mining, who got out a bit of cobalt from those mines, which has gone into debt.

Children are basically rat mining in line. Rat mining means that when you make a small dig, a small hole, children go into it and they dig small parts of the line, put it in a—they basically have a belt and small bags. They put those things in the bags and they come out. Why do they go in? Because it's a narrow presence. And what happens if you do? They die a lot. Also, most children.

There's a paper. I'll just send it out. It's basically a report on how Apple benefits from this entire rat-banning economy or in African countries.

Now, when Marx is talking about the usurpation of knowledge, what he is also saying is exactly what people knew through their lived experience. The idea of, "I have made this table on my own, and if you want to learn how to make this table, you come, we'll meet." And as a master, this was the master. It's around the mode of the guild.

Guilds are where there is a master craftsman and there are apprentices. You come and work with a group of masters, and we keep on learning. The question here is: how much of that knowledge from the shop floor can be put into a machine?

What you actually—the most important is that you can use the machine. Amount of unskilled workers you can get, the more replaceable they are, the more stable the economy is. If I have skilled workers who are non-replaceable, not disposable on a daily basis, they will come and ask for more wages. But if you can tell him, “I don't need you as a working force. Akshay can work in place too.” Akshay doesn't want to work, I want to throw him out, I will get another person. Workers and work: work doesn't get replaced, but workers. The more replaceable they are, it's better for the economy.

That's why they want to put a lot of skilled knowledge into machines. And we are at the brink of that space. The crisis that capitalism is going to hit now is what's not going to work for blue-collar workers. People are going. Factories. This is always in the crisis. They have been de-skilled to a point that everybody becomes replaceable. That's what it is.

But now the jitters that are coming is to people who pay taxes. Engineers of a certain kind, doctors of a certain kind. First of all, we did a survey of around 250 doctors in that country. And every doctor suddenly forgets that they are doctors. That's right. They say there's a hierarchy of doctors. And I am very—I'm going to be very safe because I'm an, I guess, master surgery. Sometimes I'm very safe because I am a pediatrician and nobody's going to trust children's medication and care with machines of any kind.

But most of the replace—they're saying that. Radiologist, somebody who looks after your X-ray and says this is a problem. Or a pathologist who works with pharmacies, right, to actually think about drugs. These jobs will be replaced. The first time this technology of generative error is bringing this generous in this class of people. They never fail this. It's not a lot of them.

And the idea exactly where one starts off is class struggle. Today, if you think about whether there's an interest in a book called Nerd Reich. You know what Reich means? Have you heard about Third Reich? Abdullah, what is Third Reich? Reich means empire from Devani. There was the first writer of Nabaliko Empire, the second writer, the Indian Devonians, the third writer. Yes.

So now we have something but a Nerd Reich. It's a funny book about Silicon Valley and about the authority that they want in this world. So when this usurpation came, one happening and these killings is a part of it.

Marx says that what does a market feel? First, that is economics. Like, historically, economics, because a lot of things happen. It's asking a very simple question: How do you feel on a day-to-day basis when you are a worker in this kind of a security? How does somebody feel on a day-to-day basis in a cubicle in Deloitte, which is just next door, was Marx's question.

And what is it that—so I think Marx's project is very aspirational. That's the problem. A lot of people don't take it seriously because—don't say that, “Oh, he speculates a lot, he's a dreamer,” right? But the question is very interesting, right? Where do you find yourself? Is there anything that's you?

For example, the mantra. How are you unique on Manchu? Okay, who wants to ask this question? How is somebody elite from the rest of this class? Now we spend a lot of time with each other, okay? How is somebody very evening? That I do this or I am this, that nobody else is. Does anybody have a problem? I'm sure you think you have that, but you're not telling what it works. How does that something make you unique?

But the idea here is that everybody is unique in this world. Is that what Captain's dreaming? Is that there is no community, there are individuals. Were different, were brilliant, were entrepreneurial. What makes us move? That's the question.

I think one of the more fundamental movie classes, I mean, is the background and the not great point. How were we then in a capitalist society? Again, the question will go back to so many years, right? To village India, where it mattered which caste I am, who my parents are, what kind of land I hold. Why am I talking about this now? Why does it make sense?

All right. Which one you want, are we doing? Abdullah, how are you taking from the center class? If I could give you one aspect, then maybe if I'm taking this class and I have not given it. That's fine, just talking about this class.

Okay. Great point. Now, what he said is he's you. Because he consumes. That's right? What do you say right now? And all of a unique because you consume, go to play games, different kinds of things. That's absolutely the heart of capitalist life.

I like to go to the hills, Aunt likes to go to the forest, she likes to go to the beach. What you do is consume the result. What does you mean? For example, I'll just say something. That something that's unique, I feel this, I realized a lot of people went to there, but I don't know a lot of people who really go this way.

So I'm really convinced that I am an atheist. I'm very convinced about it. And my entire family—it's a very taste. But we would place them into the idea of being liberals. So they understand every religion is important. Even people who are atheists are important, agnostics are important. There are other things. I am saying it.

Now, you would have heard this from a lot of people that they're interested. The question is, I believe in something else. I have believed from very childhood onwards that there is an idea of a category of—how do you say it?—non-tangible entities in this world, too. For example, I would like to believe that the ghost stories are true. Or I would like to believe that there are different forms of spirits that live in this world.

It's a contradiction that exists. And this contradiction exists in me because I was trained in two strands of things. One is science fiction, and the other is a certain kind of progressive literature. And I don't want to be any one of them completely. I'm going to live with this knowledge.

For example, there is this Iranian poet. His name is Nizami. So Nizami was asked by one of the of Iran—this is the 17th century. Again, that's the heart of reformationist liberal packet in Europe. Very much ahead of Europe in every possible way.

And this Bhaksha tells Nizami that you have to write the most beautiful poem ever about me and my kingdom. And now Nizami's like, "How do I write something like this?" And Nizami is like, "I need to find a master first." And a master who doesn't exist—there's no living proof of his master existing.

So Nizami goes around in the desert. He's travelling around, and in Istanbul, around Istanbul in the Pradesh area, what happens is that he's lost his spy and himself, and he says there's a pastel called Kizar Shah, K-I-Z-R Shah. Is Shah, also known as Daryasa, and in Sindhi history, he is known as Chuli Ra.

So, this st. who is said to be trapping on a fish. This wasn't close. That's why Darya means a river. Daryasa means a lot of fishes and lot of. So this person is travelling. This person meets Nizami and basically gives him what would be known as a mantra or something like that, a two-minute TED Talk. And Nizami writes the most beautiful poem ever.

Question: Here is now: this is, I'll just go to different philosophers and come back. According to Max Weber, who's literally a competitor to Karl Marx, he says, "An enchanted world. A world in which everything is not predictable, everything cannot be rationalized." And Marx—and what he's afraid of—Max Weber is also afraid of capitalism. This enchantment will go away. And we are all going to be very same with each other. I would be very much like him, he would be interesting. We'll create discrete clones of each other.

Because a lot of these stories will be like, "It's an idiotic, stupid story. Because all this example story, why should I believe that? In this hotel." At the heart of it now comes the question, then, where I was, that what is the relationship, or how do I feel about my workplace and my work?

Marx says, the first thing Marx says, the person who is working in the Ford factory, the worker who's putting in the screws on that beautiful tire, or let's say McLaren or any other company, can never own the product. You can never own a product. A person who develops a need, let's say an LLM library, a library to be used for next-generation LLMs, would never be, most likely never be, the owner of that product.

We have a candidate from our college who developed a library on which to take Amphiba Prize. But he can never own Amfrigat for short. We'll talk about that data, how they can approach influence on other roles in the race.

The question here is that the product of our labor is never going to be yours. So, you are not going to enjoy the fruit of it. Whereas, on the other hand, if I knew how to do carpentry, I would have not got things from Ikea. Saturday and Sundays, I would have sat and worked on tables and chairs for myself. I would have enjoyed the fruit of the product, of the produce, when it created I.

This is called alienation from the product. I'm completely—I don't know. And half of the time, if you think about a food factory, as a worker in a Ford factory, you will never be, possibly never be, able to sit in that car, also on the streets, also.

The second question is: now that everybody is in the A place, this point A, this point B, C, they have stations, right? How many of you are F1 fans? You've seen pits? You know what the pit stops? So it's like there are multiple pit stops in which the car stops. These are all pit stops.

So if, let's say, I am in pit A, what's in here? And Shira is in pit B. And I have no proof of chirakras. I will be like, "We don't need chirakras. They don't do any." That's why you always find these kinds of things being said. Like somebody—I got a report yesterday—but, like, somebody would come, I had this come and tell me, "We don't need to. Why do we require them?"

I feel that we don't require them to any extent. Or somebody might say, why do we require accountants anymore? We keep on feeding regular data, scan numbers. We don't have a specific attempt. Why does anybody just go into this, into this analysis with this kind of people?

What is being said is, a worker doesn't relate with another worker. What is being said is, I am alienated from another faculty in the same campus. Alienation is something that—so basically, I don't relate to somebody else who teaches something else. Thus, I don't value their importance.

And I will very honestly tell you one thing. I'm sure there are people, because I come from out of the time of the Soviet development awareness was very common, is that there were a lot of faculty in this campus wasting the money and having an ESA said it's irrelevant.

I don't understand. An institute called International Institute of Information Technology has a department called Human Science Research Center at the sixth floor of the most 50 building of this campus. And then there are faculties there who are basically moving in and around about 80 additional months. A lot of people might wonder why they are involved.

What is being said is not that they have a value judgment by Marx. Marx is saying we do not relate to each other. We're alienated from each other. Thus, because this has been broken down, it is the capitalist production that has brought into space. It's not about something good or bad. It's not all the rather.

The third form of alienation is you are alienated from the labor process. It simply means I can't make this entire table. Thus, I don't have an imagination of what the table would look like from this paper.

Earlier, when you just think about a creative project that you did, anything that you might create, you always—you know what happens when it's treating this treatment as such—is where you don't know what the goal is or how it's going to look, but you have, I'll say, a very cloudy vision of the thing. Sometimes it's for a purpose in that sense.

For example, let's say I'm designing—let's say we are designing an exhibition on the history of computing in India. Should be done in there, absolutely should be done in there. We should have a museum of that. Let's say we want to do something like that, like an exhibition on the history of computing in India. We should have certain kinds of visions of what it wants to do, what it might look like. Then the creative process starts.

Although we don't have a formal idea of what it is, this is born in business. My job is to come and make sure that the school that went here is tight enough. That's all that I want to know. I'm completely alienated from this labor process.

When we're talking about alienation, all this alienation are conjugated variables. It's not that it's separate. It cannot be somebody who's alienated from the labor process but not alienated from the product. If you have one kind of alienation, you have all kinds of alienation to do.

And the last point that Marx makes is: in this entire process, individuals are alienated from their species-being.

Now, what is the question? So what does a species mean? What is a species? What is species function? What does species stand for? Are human beings a species? Single species, or do we have multiple species? We are a single species. What is it called? Homo sapiens?

So in that sense, there are multiple species in this world, right? A species is basically categorization of animals. You might not think of ourselves as animals. We are very much a mammal, thus an animal. It is a categorization in that sense.

Now, the question is, what does species-being mean? The question that is done—what is it to be a human? And for Marx, the answer is very simple. To be human is to be creative and to labor. Both the things have been taken away in this labor process.

Today you labor. You can say you labor, you're saying that labor, but you don't labor for the things that you want to do. We labor for things that other forms are to do. I made a paper for that. And we obviously have a paper.

The question is, did you people have, in philosophy last year, last semester, did you have philology by any chance? Did somebody talk about a guy called Heidegger? Just to breathe this idea of being. What is being? Being means a thing. This is a being. It has form, it has a purpose, it has a meaning.

Like humans also. Our body, and somehow humans have a purpose. The purpose can be as reduced as in animals to reproduce and to eat. That's how they reproduce. They will keep themselves living and they will reproduce the next generation.

As humans, also, reduce our existence to absolutely that level. Or the question here is that Marx is asking: since we are not animals, what is it that we are here for? Right? The other way that being can be understood.

Where are we in space and time that defines our being? Today, we are here in the 21st century, right at the brink of a new, very new, novel technology called General. We have multiple wars going on in this world. India seems to be quite divided on where it stands vis-à-vis education, healthcare, politics. There are a lot of difficult ideas that are all around; it's conflicting ideas, right?

The other question is: Who is being with whom you are with? This is about social relations. For Marx, if you take this idea further of alienation, where you come to is through this production process. It's not only about labor, product, labor process, and the species being, but we are also alienated individuals from our families. We can draw that extension there from that point. And so it doesn't stop at the production place.

When people say that the personal is different from the professional, it doesn't stay there because exactly with the point, if you see movies, it's very much there. Somebody who is very frustrated with work would find that space or letting out of that frustration in their household.

I have heard people say this thing when I was a child also, about this: a father saying that I have only seen my children probe what I want to do because he goes out to work at 8 in the morning and comes back at around 11, and they have been sleeping both the time, which you do. So he mostly finds me going like this, not like this. This statement is very simple, but it says that I really am not being able to experience life as I would like it to be because my identity is my work and I don't—

Okay, it's 3:10. When is your sufficient for the project? Is that the topics have been sold? Topics are also. Yeah, that was yesterday night. How many of you are willing to meet me on the 27th and 28th? You have visits, so what is the pressure item visit? I know what this semester is. Can you spare 15 minutes? Preferable to just not have them because we could also just prepare better and spend a bit more time.

What's the daily day? Daily. We'll do it in the one, two sheets. Acceptable. But then if we get it done early so that we can actually read about it, that's what I was thinking. But I don't have any more time. The best we can do is tomorrow evening. But again, tomorrow and day after evening, if we do it then, it means that we'll all be stacked into this Friday, or no time.

Are you okay with weekend? You okay with weekends? Yeah. Okay. Well, we'll find some time in the evenings of Friday, Saturday, Sunday watch. So Thursday, Friday, Saturday, we'll try to find it. But none of your quizzes getting hampered because of this weekly period or preparation of any other kind of stuff.

But how many people are you? Aksha, you have tell your bathroom. Aksha approach? How many are of you eating people? So is your training people? Twenty-two. Twenty.

So what we will do is that we will do a seven, seven, fourteen, seven, seven, six kind of a plate of those three days. What's going to happen is that are you all okay with these three days? And I will just slot you seven to nine points. All time works, and after this, if you want to exchange cards amongst yourself, I don't care. But there shouldn't be a slot that's everything. This Akula doesn't like Saturday at seven. Let's ship it, exchange with lunch. But somebody has to clear up that time. So it just announces cause that.

Okay. This was one of it. The other thing that's important is how did they get the book Annihilation of Caste? Center like that's a mark because I only do people. How many of you need art copies? I didn't ask how many of you preferred art copies. How many of you only can read art copies? How many of you would prefer art copies? Rest is downloaded and started it serverless.

Okay, now I will just talk a bit about your website because I want to start this conversation while I'm done in English. Your web servicer will be 20% of your grades, as I told you. So let's say I have 50% of the grades, so 20% goes there. Forget that I am going to ask you there what is any issue. I am not going to ask you such questions. I know right now.

Right now, if he searches here in Claude Chinna or L, and they can do the much better thing, you have two essays, two passages in the questionnaire, and you will answer from that question, from the passage itself. You are expected to use the theories that we are reading here in your answers. They will not be explicitly mentioned here.

The other thing is, those passages will be such that it's not like, oh well, this is so prominent in the alienation. You can actually do something else too in the same passage in the alienation, and you can still score marks. Thus, it is very much the marks that you get is what you have in the world. You will not be able to compare it to IANH yourself.

This IANH might have thought that I am not going to use this. I am going to use something very different as a critical framework which I have, which I read in the course. But on the other hand, everyone who has written about any issue. So it's going to be very subjective marketing for all of you. I'm going to check the reports of all.

Yes, your question was, so you will do finally. The questions will be open-ended. The market will be very close-ended from answer.

Now, I wanted to open Raymond Aaron, Volume 1, if you can. Proper uniform. Simple thing. Do you have to go to the marks chapter? What I want you to do is to read the introduction of this chapter. The introduction paragraph is where they do not have this marking there. Here you see three. In page number 148, there is three written here. Can you see three on the left-hand corner? What we will do is keep the introduction. Basically, just before where one is written, is the introduction. We read that the piece come after hitting number three.

Just read three on your own and come to class. This is Marx's theory of exploitation. This is the last topic on Marx of this. So you read the introduction at this title of Marx's chapter, intro, and your task, at least the next time when we meet, which is Friday, right? It's not that big. It's worth 5 to 7 pages as well. Is to come and ask me questions. And I will evaluate your questions in that sense. Evaluate it as well. I am not going to put your marks assignment, but still. Please, if you have difficulty in understanding, you ask questions in class. Otherwise, I would feel that this is something that you could do on your own, and I will read the mindset. So please read it now. I think it's going to be difficult, so I just want to check whether it's possible.

I think we'll stop for today, but before that I want to ask volleyball questions. Great with anything. How many of you feel that—how many of you following the TA ship hike wheel threat? We are forced to follow us. How did you see that somebody wrote in a mail two words? Somebody wrote free labour. Do you see that? And somebody wrote exploitation. Is it interesting that people use Marxist words, as in Marxist, not in our communistry? Marxist theorization.

I want to ask that question of how we feel that the entire thing is coming. Where is this entire, I'll say, complaint coming from when it comes to students? What comes? Can I be devil sample? I'm just figuring that. I completely stand on the other side of people's state.

When you go to watch a movie in a seminar, you pay money for a ticket. What do you ask in return for that movie? Yeah, would we ask something else? Why did you ask something else from London? Except for showing the remote. That's what it is there for.

The problem here is something else. Here, the movie hall, we're also working in the movie hall. That's the problem. They're buying even at the movie hall, but they're also expected to work in the movie hall. That's why the question of competition is coming. Otherwise, if you want to let's say that you're all just clients, anyone asks for competition?

Because of E, that's where there's more things that should be. According to how is the rate at which EAs get fixed? It's better than the IMEs at least, but if you compare the ratio at which I saw that. I'm saying that forget about the speaker's art. That's what I'm saying with the argument. I want to declare or make a disjuncture between the fees and the teacher.

Otherwise, I'm saying, how do they come out of this? I'm not a thing of the companies where they come from. They're not employees. It's just a variable that the box provides, and 6000s are very large. Even the new 7500, based on the current statement, is arbitrary. And I think it's completely the other way around as a leader, and I want to generally ask for more compensation.

The best thing I can bring up is that my game increase to justify my being compensated more. Other than that, I don't see, if I were to go telecroft, I put more effort, can I get more compensated? I won't see that discussion working. But I don't understand this part of how is it that your fees would keep on increasing to pay you people back.

I'm just saying, isn't it a weird logic? Assuming you're paying X amount as a fees and you're paying Y amount as the monthly patient, so there's a specific ratio of X to Y that you can get a pair of pairs a net pay to the canvas because you're getting—yes, that I—now that net amount that you pay to the canvas is increasing every single year. So if you increase Y as well, then the net elati raises.

Yeah, you know, also, like, the last few years of players or huge deals, new units, et cetera. And we have the players work. I mean, they compete devices here, you know, even they both have—even they work more. We are the work more.

5 or so million packs, but we can be fixing—the bigger goods is getting asynchronous, and they were definitely up to 15 cm. At least there is an affordability payment, if not working.

I have a very simple question. Why aren't people fighting the other battle, that we will not let the fees increase for our incoming vaccine center? I think that is also an argument that people understand, because there's so many infrastructural changes and there's inflation changes. They are trying to increase the quality of life on campus. So a free night is new. But at the same time, because of the same factors, the hype inflation is also—the interesting thing is that what I feel is that you will get a hike of what you want, right? I'm sure you will get a hike, with an increase in your fees next year?

No, so what they are proposing now is to peg the PAship compensation to the fees and not just have a fixed number. So you peg it to 2% of the fees is what they are proposing. It's scandalous in major wheels, because what's going to happen is people will find that, let's say, a 2nd year is there and 4th year is there, in the same 4th team—or 2nd. I don't think 3rd and 4th. The 3rd would be paid a different fee and the 4th would be paid a different peership amount for the same job.

In many of the cases, the TAs are from different matches, you know, so that particular year's achievement tuition fee of the TA short compensation would be. But everybody will be proposing. That is what we're going to propose soon.

I was just asking a brief question. In this entire process, there was a mention of somebody's name. Did somebody try to argue that you people are not workers? How are you asking for a wage in that sense? And so the argument was that you are not workers, you are helping workers. And since you are helping workers, you are getting this as a gift.

The interesting point there is that it's almost an inherent demand of a capitalist system, and it's not illegal for people's body, so that people remain alienated from resources. What you see is a creation. The main problem is a creation that doesn't exist, that exists at your end. That doesn't exist at private energy also.

I'm sure people would show brute power over others, right? Listen, I don't like this guy, and I'm the VA. I would be very rude to this person. It will happen. I've heard a lot of your friends who have faced it. There are other kinds of gender dynamics that have happened. For example, some of them said that some of you have called for an interview, a VA interview, at least in the moment. I was like, this is not bad. But then again, my colleagues explained that, see, these people are always awake in the night. That's why children said, okay, they're fine, they have that. But there is an issue when it comes to the exercise of power also.

And some people actually want a lot more than others in PHP also. It's not even as symmetrical as this, that this table is to come and there is a line there. I'm not making a statement, but let's say if they stop paying TAs at all, you have no compensation tomorrow. There will still be people showing up to TA at the time. That's what you will not be able to go for, that line where saying, "No, please pay me from tomorrow," which is a state of affairs in American universities.

If your demands are not met, to be able to not—you'll never be able to go away. There were business people tied to labs. What do you do? Don't do it. Worst-case scenario, someone needs less bread, comes and takes over, and they're starting in worse again.

But anyways, I don't think that's a good argument to put, because it puts people in backward and they become skeptical. They don't ask. The worst might come, that's why let's not ask anything else. We don't. That's a very bad way of asking. Let her to the obvious things that is professional.

So I won't name names, just like you did not, but a particular person on Miramet talked about this thing. So a particular kind of course that they take. Everyone knows the effort that they make, their TAs in their courses. So I would like to see how their courses pan out if they do not have TAs in their courses, which I don't think will ever move properly, because they lose their TAs. And then they might at least put another professional in place of the selections.

What he's saying is that it's going to affect the tendency, and the individual is going to suffer for it, but I think it's a much broader question of what everybody thinks about like that.

Anyway, so we'll come back, but please leave the exploitation part and come back, because that's the last part of this. The rest is in billions as well as red. And always in my course, at least this part, you are supposed to be aware.

You are not supposed to mark up that. Please be aware and come up with your arguments. That's it. Don't bug up Mark said this in this year. I'm not interested in that. Okay, so I'll see you then on the
