I guess I'm not going to use it. I think I'm going to do this. But somehow it's a little bit simple, so you can have a sharp user. And the fact that I wasn't sure. But I don't know why some people are saying fast. Okay, but it's all there, and it's not only short. But if I'm doing sleep, it's nothing, but then see the app, which I'm going to say I don't show my sketch. So we are—this is just like the stars of the single.

Okay, I think we spoke about Marx's concept of alienation. Snaplaw's generation, and the last debate was touching on exploitation. Just to move ahead, there is somebody called Imail the Home. He is a contemporary of Karl Marx, and he's a sociologist, and he's the first person to get a professorship in sociology and sciences view of it. And he's also observing capitalism, the initial years of capitalism.

And the akhan actually says, when he looks at this tappy shop floor, which has a division of paper, which means a single work gets cut down into smaller pieces, and it's done by individuals or groups of individuals. So making it stable to have nodes A to Z, and at A there are three people, we have B and one. This is the distribution situation of people.

Durkheim sees this too. Durkheim doesn't ask the question around, e.g., what does it mean for ignoring? Durkheim's question is very different. His question is: how can we do that? How does this division of labor enable or, in some ways, affect the social solidarity in human societies?

So there are two things that he's interested in as variables. One is the idea of social integration; the other is social relevance. Social integration means: how much are we integrated? This question means there is a degree to it. Should we be very, very integrated in social society? Then what happens to individualism? Or should we be loosely connected to social society, where we can preserve our individuality? Does that be? That it's impossible for somebody to not be connected to the society.

So, for him, the cauldron—there's a cauldron in which, giving all the credit, at some level, and in this case, a process of integration. Trying to work in political philosophers such as Husho, but who talks about this in hell, call to sort of a spiritual image, nature for people to ask for a state. So state itself is not an objective artifact. It is very subjective, and it's almost an internal problem. If there is no state, how will we be regulated? Everyone will kill each other. So you require an admin here, let's say, so that all of you don't start cheating or killing each other, e.g. It's almost a natural call that Russia talks about.

Then similarly, Dakhan is saying that social integration is something that is natural, and the other thing is regulation. The question that Delta asks us now, now that we see a division of labor which is different from the feudal system, what is happening to the concept of social integration?

Because in feudal times, how are you getting integrated? You're integrated in a feudal lord's family in that manner. You're tied to the land. These were mechanisms through which integration happens. In Indian society, if Durkheim has studied that, you would say caste is a method through which integration is actually propagated. An exploitative system which maintains integration, sometimes forceful integration. But it is a process through which integration and also think about regulation.

Who is regulated? The feudal lord is regulating others. Or the knights, the kings. In Indian society, you are regulated through your caste position. If you go beyond that, you will be sometimes scaled, right?

So, when you hear facility, also down the south brows in the northern part, very strange times happening in Northern Park. For example, somebody was on a horse and going to get married. The guy was pulled down. Of the hours are shorted. Why? The guy is a jatak, which is a colour cross.

These are quasi ways to which Taltha would argue a forceful regulation of people is happening. And you take this to extend to gender, to sexuality, e.g. What was the transmitter that came out last year? So, what does it now ask people to do? So, if you say, declare yourself that you are a trans person, you are supposed to go to a government hospital, and you are not standing till I cue. It will go inside. We don't know who are the people who are inside. Are they sensitive? Are they sympathetic? So, if you don't know, they would actually decide after seeing you or stripping you whether you are a trans person or not.

What is happening here is forceful recognition of bodies. And later, I don't know if we get time, but Foucault talks a lot about this, of how the knowledge about our body, our own self, is intermediated through institutions like the state. What am I, or who am I? This question is—or the question that—what is this body that I have?

Even before I have an opinion on that or I find that out, the state has already told who I am in true, sort of, ways. Your words are different. Gender is mentioned at birth. So gender is given at birth. Gender is not realized at birth. Thus, gender itself is a social construct because it gives you a gender.

Now, these are the ways in which social integration and regulation are happening. Durkheim is saying that people were of the opinion that the moment the feudal system was decaying, social integration and the social question would all cease to exist. Because you are now out there, we are not a part of the manner anymore—the freedom that we are. So people will run AWIR, they will do whatever they want, they might not even work or want to work. But Durkheim says that no, that doesn't happen. What happens is that the nature of what is called social solidarity changes. The way in which social integration happens changes with a new form of production system coming in.

So for him, a human society cannot exist without a form of social sovereignty. Every society would have social subgroups. And it is in a period of transformation, but you need better. So this idea of a unique individual is missing in Durkheim's ideation of Durkheim in sociology.

But one interesting thing is that he is similar to Marx when he takes up division of labor as a basis of his thesis on social solidarity. Somehow, they agree that the economy or economic arrangements are at the basis of social artifacts, social processes, and social interactions. For him, again, at some level, the economy is the basis, and the rest is in the superstructure. Even though he never asked about that, he doesn't like it.

Now, before we go further and see whether India's design society frees people from isolation, maybe I'll talk a bit about his methodology, and then I'll come back to this.

There's something about a social fact according to Durkheim. According to Durkheim, sociologists study social facts. So, what is a social fact? A social fact is the detection of—it's commonplace, it's common-sensical, it appears everywhere, like Atlas. There's an issue.

Another thesis that he gives using this social fact is, for him, suicide is a social fact. And think about that idea of society as a social fact. These are the individuals in the social condition. Why is suicide a social fact according to Durkheim?

According to Durkheim, even though common-sensically, or even today, this idea—telling suicide that has happened ten days back, right, when I was in Adi Karmo—twenty-three people committed suicide in the last six years that I was there. Not a specific three. Every time a suicide happened, the admin said, "I'll write down the reasons. This is more fun. They should use this." This is a love affair, okay. Then they would say mental health. They would say property issues in the family. The other problem is drugs.

What is the advocate trying to do by saying this? They don't know because I'm interested. What is that institution, and can it be done in every institution? This is what's going to happen in some countries. These would be the most probable reasons in corporate. Why do they simply have these reasons? Why is the institution? They absorb the instinct of response. They absorb the institution of response. No, but they cannot. But they're still fully responsible in something, some case of what is happening.

The individual. In all this, it's the individual's problem. You're absolving an institution, but you're saying that the center is the individual and there's something wrong there. From the maximum to the family and kin or friends. That's what it all means.

Durkheim says that this is completely wrong. I am saying suicides happen because there is a tension between regulation and integration. I put a paper on this, an Indian paper on this, that challenges Durkheim's thesis.

Durkheim is saying that, let's say this is important: this is the regulation, this is the integration. Obviously, this is possible in the media. Durkheim's point is that when a society would become, or would push individuals, to be very much independent, let's say the point is here for me, they'll come to suicide. If you push people to that extent that they lose their individuality, they'll commit suicide.

There's a very interesting case in the US. I forgot the name of the case, where one fine morning there was a current emergency in those Miami areas in the island. And one fine morning, 3,000 people came to Master City.

And it is because there was a guru or a saint, somebody—it's a very famous case—and the guru said that we are going to end this or something like that, and everybody committed suicide. Not one person was alive at the time. How can somebody do that? A person is extremely integrated in society.

Now let's say that somebody is absolutely nothing. Somebody is blurred in the individual sector. That person will also have a sense of their problems.

And for Durkheim, his data is around 1,800 suicide cases and reports of Durkheim. He is using that to understand suicide as a social factor. Very similarly, with regulation, any less-regulated suicide amount of suicides would increase, and again, very regulated suicides would actually increase. So according to Durkheim, there is a sweet spot in which individuals feel safe, secure, and they don't commit suicide.

But in all this ideation, it is society which has an immense impact on the individual. You cannot be a Robinson Crusoe in an Ironman. Right, according to that fact. These are extreme cases, according to that fact. We need to have a certain kind of connect with society, and society will be called the epitome of a certain point.

So, for him, a social fact is a sociological fact category which can be investigated through the scales of social integration and social renovation. That's what I'm saying. So everyone is trying to find out about social facts. What are the social facts out there?

There is a social fact that you people deal with a lot: grades. Grades are a social factor. Grades depend on, for example, what kind of rating we will do in a course depends on how much regulation we want. And there is a discussion on this from top to individual course, in terms of a director might say that, please, we have a general—should general rates. COVID, in COVID times, all right. What it's trying to say is how much you should regulate.

It's also a function of integration. Let's say that I put 70% in attendance of class. The grades that I have on my hand, I'm trying to invigorate you forcefully. But I'm saying that there is more attendance. I'm putting in more integration. So how do you find a balanced question about that in the first time?

Have you done any courses where there is no attendance? How do you run courses? Do you think the courses that aren't in attendance, students are much more attentive and they work hard for those courses? You understand the question? If you don't have attendance in a course, would you take more interest in that course, or does it have a relationship?

Chiral, right? Yes, what is your learning? Shaw, yes. What do you think?

No, that's not the question. Maybe somebody is not coming to class and can still have possible physical force. Is it possible?

So what about people moderate anyway? I don't know what to do now. Is it possible that they'll think that they can be done somewhere, buttons, and then instructor education, they might just come up with the exams? There are students like that in other colleges, and those students also, right?

So the question is, what happens if we make attendance not compulsory across all classes in the place? What will happen?

That's fine, means that there was more than that for that class overall. What's going to happen in six months of the United States about all kinds of problems?

So what I say is that it's completely not regulated. They go in or are not on the C sector, not that. But regulation is still pretty much. What's going to happen?

Akancha, what's going to happen? Some people may have requested an idea. But maybe very technical skills, and very few people can come to that side. So also, what is the larger picture? What's going to happen?

This is all you're saying: I'm not going to see people in class, or you people are not going to see me in this setup. What is going to happen broadly to the institution?

Your parents are going to stop giving us money. Because if they come to know about it, that attendance is not compulsory and you have not been in class, people and parents who have a problem—you are not having discipline. It's a high chance, isn't it?

A lot of parents believe it for a fact, believe it, and if I had to come to it, they are very happy that there isn't any 30 class or 81 class. Why are they happy? Why is anybody not happy that the 81 class, writing 30 class? I would really like the meeting we can attend, and at 10 or 5. That's what we might be able to do, right?

But we have an inquiry because I also come up after a weekend, my sample volume, I would like to ask you. It is because society is a very good idea. Society, whenever there's an institution, it requires signs of social regulation to be appreciated.

That's why, when you think about this guidance or the FOSS community list, the free and open software movement, that is also what they are fighting against. They are saying that I don't require a triple ID or IIT degree to be a good coder. I don't require that to go to class at 8:30 in the morning to think about a social issue.

A social activist would say, I don't love it. I think in the field, I do it when I want to do. That's where the entire idea of informal education comes into.

But let's say you were saying that you picked the right. Did you get trained in some school?

No.

Which school do you go to? I gave my—I went to class and gave an example. Which institution do you, as a third? Exams, well, and you can clear it, right?

So, let's say he has curated certification for a specific—but you learned outside. The fact is that, let's say, an undergrad didn't have this certification, didn't get the exams. Would that matter when it comes to the scale of that? Then why didn't you get certification? You don't answer the problem. Why didn't you get the examination? Or why do you think people who think if certification is examination, what you rule our language is still examination itself, but why?

Perception of society. Society perceives a lot of rational dependencies. It's about a model of parcels that you are—you have been integrated in an institution or in a social position. Thus, his certification is not about his personal skills only. It's about—he is a part of a unique group of people, a network of people, and that has been ratified by an institution.

This class could have happened anywhere at the bath in Kieran. I don't know. So you can just go to the airport and have a class without attendance. You can talk about a one-month or two-month course of what sociology is all about or what you know about it. But that is not going to happen because it is not social recognition. It doesn't have cues of incrementation because it isn't informed. And society lives out of this idea of formalization.

That's why if somebody goes and says to a bomb neighbor that I have a flat, and they get paid for it, let's say in a place like Polygon—not Polivoy, but let's say in Bangladesh—half of the flats is not going to give this, as in the landlords are not going to give flats to a couple who are not married. What is the difference between a couple married and not married? Still, between a guy and a girl, same together, young people. The difference is: you give proof that you are very well integrated in the society. You can be very well reputed by the law of the land. That's why you are safe. But the other couple in a living relationship is not safe at all.

So this is the Durkheimian methodology. Now, what Durkheim does—Durkheim says that in his lifetime he has seen two kinds of solidarity. One is the feudal type. Small-scale, the manor is very small. Fifty-odd people there, right? And it's replicable. So here's a manor A, manor B, manor C. In cities like Manchester, there are only, let's say, 600 manors. And it's almost replicable. A is almost equal to B, is almost equal to C, similar kind of setup available.

What he's saying is that there is also division of labour there. The division of labour was not based on merit or skill, based on gender and age. So women will grow and mostly serve within the manor. The men would be the people who would be ploughing and would be in agriculture.

But interesting data is, in feudal times, there are more women in agriculture than in capitalist times. Remember this point? I remember to ask the question right here. More women contributed in feudal times as farmers than when capitalism.

Now, this is traditional labour based on age and sex. So let's say that if you are 16 years old, you are not going to be the lead farmer. Your father might be farming, your two might be farming, you will be helping them out. With age, you would become the primary farmer of that part of land, but you would again stay connected to the manor, to the land, and you would basically only serve the feudal family.

The other interesting thing is that people do the same kind of work and have shared values. People are absolutely—so Siddharth knows how to participate, from getting the seed of the last harvest to growing crops today, but even so does Manchuria. They are replaceable in that sense. Everybody used to be very similar to the other. Everybody had their similar skill to offer.

But that doesn't mean that you will have few exceptions. For example, you obviously had blacksmiths, who are not quite depicted, right? But if you ask somebody who comes from the village—for example, I don't know whether you met him—we have a philosophy piece from Ashipur. Ashipur is from a village. He knows how to do agriculture himself, but he also knows how to build the plant. Or you have seen the mechanism through a plough spoon also.

So people in this setup almost had a very similar set of skills. Thus, these are called generalizable skills. And thus, they are very similar to each other. And this is the solidarity, sort of mechanical solidarity, because it comes through similarity in meaning.

What does it mean? I am going to consider, let's say, people to be a part of the society because we have very similar skills. We have very similar values. So let's get married at 18. None of us get home-skilled. But if that is a value, or that both of us started farming as a lead farmer of wetland at the almost age and quite implemented farming, we both know sort of wet rituals.

Uniformity is what led to having this society having a such kind of a social question, which is also called a social sorry. Thus, the societies could have very similar kinds of social intervention. The law of the land would be very similar and tied to this order. We'll come to that.

Did we speak about total cultures sometime in this class? We did, great. So, this is very similar in total cultures also. The total of the tribe represents the tribe itself as well as each individual. So we belong to that tribe. Here we are all in this tribe, we are all uniform, we are all in symmetry.

The only distinction in the so-called cultures is that there is a divine infotention. That is not your divine potential, but it's not who's a whole delota. How does someone become? So whether that justification would be asked for, it's going to be that it is to divinity that somebody has a right to their legal leader. It is to divinity that somebody has a right to their tribal leader. And most things pass through family member. Somebody who is middle lord, he gives it to their son or son-in-law, very similarly in the total culture society.

Things change from here in the capitalist society. Individuals run out of the civil societies because there is, first of all, a pandemic in the farmer's sector. So they run towards the cities. There are mills that have been set up which need new labor. They require recruitment of the city community. So the serfs and what is one of the feedbacks, they run towards the cities with their families.

And the type of division of labor changes. Earlier, you were given a job based on your age and gender. Today, in this society, you will be given a job based on the skill that you have and the skill that you hold for yourself. For example, let's say somebody is very good at hammering nails on this disk, they would be getting that job. Now, after three to four years, they would be very specialized in only doing that.

The addition of labels world frees itself from age and to somewhat gender also, to specialization. And obviously, today we have reached a pinnacle of specialization. Because today, what we are saying is that I have usurped all the skill that a human has within a machine. That's not the place of machinery. Sorry, the human article.

Earlier, individuals were taught to have any special skill, that's why merit and other terms, and they used individuals. It is a skill special. It comes into the capitalism. That's why Marx says it's a progressive society, which means you're not tied by your policy. Even though you might be born in a society, of the condition to always move out of that. That's what Marx is saying, because that's where it's progressive.

Now, according to Durkheim, this entire solidarity is coming because, even though people are placed at different parts, people have to depend on each other. It is only when somebody has cleaned the raw material that I can actually work on the later on. There is an interdependence that gets created in this division of later on. That is what reading the solidarity.

And Marx would decide about it. Marx would say this is not a solidarity. People don't care about solidarity, they are just going there as alienated labor and just working for a wage. Because Marx says, right, that you cannot, you are alienated from your fellow worker. It's one of his statements.

So, however, how do you even realize that you're dependent? But Durkheim would say that I'm not talking about individual process but also the process. I'm saying that because the process has changed and people have to be interdependent on each other, that's why the society has a certain kind of. And thus, a solid mechanical recognition was required, which is different from the earlier practice.

So, does it ask the question that I have in my life when I have studied or known about type of solid methods, and then organic? In between, what happened? When mechanical solidarity is waning and organic solidarity is coming up, not in its full force, he calls it a steel of. It is meaningless of work. A transient form generated between the collapse of mechanical solidarity and patient water.

It is when people are running out of their villages because obviously you can understand the moment somebody like a lot of from the feudal lord's manor, the feudal lord would like to whip him up or kill that family. So there's a lot of tension going on. Before this becomes a norm, working in factories becomes a norm, there's a lot of to and fro. I'm sure people went over to the cities, they got pulled back through certain kind of muscle power, back to their own villages.

Things that happen. This is a state of animal according to Durkheim. And when solidarity is changed, in its transformation, this is the state that exists. The other important part that he is saying is that in Shah Deva itself, this is where he is becoming regressive.

He is saying it should be based on either natural principle, which is who has what kind of a state, or based on inequalities and birth. But what it should not have is to ascribe privileges.

What does a state statement mean? Let's say that you argue that a man can walk for 12 hours in the field for 30 days a month. A woman, because of her natural self, maybe will miss out on five to six weeks of work. That's like now. That's why, according to him, he would say that laboring in that agricultural food should be only done by the man thought of. He's up for this, and secondly, he's up for skill.

The man who will work for those 30 days, if somebody is better in that job within the men, by competing with other men, they should get a chance to compete with men. But what shouldn't happen is somebody shouldn't get a privilege of working in a certain part of the division of labor, not working at all because that person is somebody's son or daughter, or somebody has inherited, or whatever.

That's what he says: inheritance should be banned. Everybody earns in their own life, doesn't get to save up, they die, the money. Or some other form of mechanism, again, there is a circulation that's a little bit. Nobody can hold wealth, according to Kushan. Robert Duckland, that is what is not natural in a society. And he brings about this abnormal state of anomaly and not, because it doesn't follow the natural law, which is around skin, or which is one of the things around national equality, gender equality, or race. Put the other one together.

It's very interesting that you have to understand that even when Marx is writing this, all his writings, it's around the question of men. He'll just keep on writing men, men, men, men, men. Engels, when he's writing Private Property, the book we write is Private Property. If these are products of rectangles, so the expectation of even having a producer will not work. It took around more than a hundred years to realize that they're tending to music, or they're kind of a musician.

Now what has happened is that there is a change of division of labor, which has brought about a change in solidarity. The other layer that I want to work with is a type of regulation. Because independence has changed, thus regulation has to also change. Because there is a change in.

And what changes is Michel Foucault, in his book called The Punish, writes a very vivid case of a corporal punishment, a capital punishment. He says that, and he is reading from Prison Balls or Prison Corner, that a man is the center of the courtier. His four limbs are tied to four horses at four ends. And there's another man, a police officer, who's standing beside these horses. There's a bell that's struck there three times, and all the horses are whipped. Past the horse, what do the horses do? They start running, and it will tear the body apart of the man on the pulpit or the primary.

The question that comes in the masses is: why is this form of punishment there? Why is there still a very regressive law there in these societies? We don't do this in the research law. Most societies, even if there is a capital punishment, it's going to be by hanging. All it is, other than hanging, the less severe one is retribution, but we will stop doing that. Mostly it is by hanging. We need to do that in punishment.

The question is, how did this kind of law change? First of all, reduction in capital punishment in societies; second, changing the nature of capital design. And I forgot a third time: the moment somebody commits a crime in a society which had mechanical solidarity, because people could relate to one another, each person felt that greed. Because I am like creatures that say, right? If he committed a crime, I felt even I had to seize upon it, and it had to be purged. It's like a cancer that needs to be cut out, not to be treated.

That's to show a point, to make a point. This was a black sheet on the stripe. These kind of functions were done. The moment that solidarity changes into we are all different but we are dependent, laws become less simple, because the first thing people start recognizing is, I'm not letting these not like me because I don't know why he did what he did. I start respecting context.

Earlier, I didn't have to respect the context, because according to me, everybody had the same context. Everybody's context in this, there's a chance that somebody can be reformed. So reformative verbs or destitutive verb comes from the idea that we are all different, we have to come from different contexts, and there's a chance of reformation.

This was not existent in a society, the feudal terms or the full terms. There is no, there's—I don't know how to understand why people are doing it. I have the same kind of as somebody else.

Questions with this solution? Do you have the question? What about, let's say, about the question? What's going to happen if judges or courts are closed in this country?

Let's say that there is no decision when it comes to criminal proceedings. Let's start talking about it. I'm going to find people out of others, who's going to pile up it. It's going to go, let's say, into a certain kind of categorization, which would be done on LNNs, and it's going to score people and should score them in. The criminal gets, right? They will that one of the function. So trials would be there. Everything is to be fed not to the judge but to a language model. And a language model is not in position. Based on countries and cultures? What's the problem? Or is it boring it is also? We lose context, of course. We lose context? No, we'll want to use the text. Now we have changed the name of IPC and CRT to Bharatiya Sandy Harbor, right? So we did more Bharatiya, and also we can feed in all the previous cases, like lats of cases, criminal cases, right? We did all that goes in, right? And also give it 2 min if you look. First I said, just say so, stay with your thoughts of it. Okay, now let's do another thing. Now you can talk with one person in your on your deciding and discuss also. And then, because half of you are sleeping in body. I can see that you are very sleepy. You're fixing to sleep. I am not forcing you to speak. You can speak if you want to speak. You have that freedom.

The action really is. And this is a trend or something. So CPO. Okay, let's start this account. So, um, we get prioritized the whole judges and laws and stuff. Yeah. And if, if we 2 min, I can sort of explain. So, uh, it stemmed from the original question of, let's say, if a country loses its army, what will happen? So the general conclusion or notion is it becomes defenseless, it gets attacked. But just another way of seeing it is that immediately there will be privatization, and, you know, a paid body comes in in its place and starts taking that action. So I guess the same thing: as much as we are losing a whole system, there will be a construct so fastly set up that it will take place in, you know, builder or whatever is left after removing and stripping off the law and the systems in place.

In the order of language process, of course, in L and the case, so it won't be able to make, like, it will only think about a situation in a very mathematical or in the way which it has been given. Again, if there are situations where new cases come up which are a mix of many, many other different cases, where it's a very complex problem to be thought about, an LM won't be efficient enough, even if, because the previous data has not been enough to create the model, to judge any situation in the future.

The 3rd case is that, um, if we need arguments from both of the sides of the argument, guilty and the innocent. So, in case the innocent side is not able to prove its, uh, they're not able to feel that, and the guilty, the ones who are guilty, have higher power in society, or they can just manipulate the model. They can force the argument to move in their direction.

If we are talking about the models that are in the present state, then they have ISS, a lot of biases. And if we are imagining that we have a lot of different models, really have fed all the past cases into mode, then it will be influenced by the past cases instead of coming up with another approach. So, as I think with the Shami Maharaj, e.g., the proceedings start again earlier this year. But if the model has knowledge of the previous time the same debate was discussed in the road, then we'll take that as a standard for judging the case again.

So, what are you going to do? So I am in the classroom, so you can look at your example. Who's in my 3rd hand? First of all, it's not an 8. It's either a he or a label. So I don't understand why you give it a different list of responses. Now, I can't. I'm not overdoing it right now. It should be in my other classes, because there your juniors were sitting there. So, either you do my class, or, like what Arthur did right now, you do that. He had a medical emergency, he asked me, and he left. So you have something to eat, give your admittance, and leave. Okay. I don't expect, like, my colleagues, for you to sleep and read. It's my dream. I'm enough to prepare myself.

So, yeah, compliment what is said. I think one of us is also going to desire a judge. Another one is also going to pilot, which is also going to reference data spaces and is also going to, like, take more time coming in situations. What brings biased citizens and judgment? Delete the difference in the way of society, and bias is the way we have the secretary's lesson. Functional cortex for the corporations. Areas? I'm going to say same person regarding that feature. What is where is speeding different? Is it an error between speeds reference? So that's very speedy. Keep it coming back. I get all the chance. Okay. You food is the fire based hand with the only question that they are doing that every. What is the chart?

You said it would be great or not passing. Yeah. No, but there is both. But, oh, the same that those judgments itself have biased the same thing. No, the training data itself, that's same. I picked it up from libraries, and I'm talking about two things you're saying. The same, the way the data are about the—I was saying that the judgments of the past, the human judgments, are tensor of the bias. What are you saying? Portugal's other spast stuff.

But then there's one sort, like, very clear, where, because of what we—it's kind of like empathy, but it can also be what they deem to, you know, society on law. Sure. So what is giving the looking, you say, and how do you fail this case in the version, and how do you fight with this?

Well, speed adds to unset false organisms. It can be possible to swear like a prism. What's your name? Yes, how much do you—I think they put closer there, like they're studying the previous thing, and they—but hair can't, like, it has to change the—they say. The case and, okay, that kind of stuff changed, or then you guys have the question from transformation. Once I'm not sure why is it that Jeffrey Mosi—I mean, there are—the point where having you—our discussion tried to make was essentially going to be like a model parameter structure.

Yeah, yeah, I understood. I'll just come to the question just quickly. Do you have a decon? I don't think so. My point: you have proper judgment on things that are not constantly digitally defined, but as such, a is a valid function.

Yeah, so basically any—what you would say—the every new case as a new, as a novel case, right, which is beyond Chargement or anything, it's not this past purpose. So, like, we have different levels of votes in the so that.

Okay, yeah, so that's great. So what she's saying is that there is—judiciary itself is tripartite in it, right? The district books, there are high courts, the supreme courts. There are also multiple timeline courts. There are sessions courts, e.g. These are independent sessions courts. There are multiple district courts here. And so every court itself has a dimension based on what kind of cases they stand on. Some are for civil, some for criminal, some—so you're going to have three layers of elements, each being more accurate.

You could have—what don't we have it right now? The base model, the pro model, the hyper-pro model. Do that in case I create one was the legislative model for all the levels of this. That's what I see. It depends on which class you come from. If you can't afford the most accurate judgment, so what were the base money in this week for all?

That brings me back to the question of privatization. The problem with privatization is that judicial itself, when you move from the concept of divinity—we came with the concept of modern state. And modern state is supposed to run after the Treaty of Westphalia through a set of rules. That is the constitution. That country. That can be the written constitution, that can be the verbal constitution, whatever.

So judiciary gains its legitimacy from the constitution. The oath that the chief justice takes, it's to the constitution. My question is: when it's privatized, who do they owe their accountability to?

So the justification for that is, the moment you remove, let's say again, coming back to the question: the moment you remove the laws or the existing, let's say, force, the skeleton of it is still left over. So the people who have incentive to fill the skeleton or strip the skeleton have a clash, and by putting my money in, or people by putting their money in, will drive each incentive in a way that one party at the ends of the crowd.

So money here replaces divinity for all purpose. And if somebody asks, oh, and divinity in itself is something that people can question. Divinity is not the remote, but there is an authority. It was a divine authority earlier; it is a constitutional authority. But then I can ask if somebody, let's say, authority gave her power, I can ask who has given her power. But if there's a bunch of investors putting their money, time, and effort into her, there is reason for me not to, you know, fundamentally question, okay, why is this happening when I myself am contributing to it?

So that was the whole idea. The problem really is that when this talk about advancing in this case, we can say that models also have a functionality for modern. But the point there is that meaning gelatins cannot do properly if they don't.

Yeah, I was just exactly coming to that. What I was saying is the only thing that is, I'll say, important in the human system, which still attracts me to that, I can hold somebody accountable who has taken a wrong decision. I still have a human being to say that this person is guilty of the bias. Once I remove that, who is actually biased? It's a power person, I don't know. I'm not saying that today human judges don't have a caste-based crisis.

I'll give you a reason. Post-1947, find it out how many have been punished for severely care, and find it out how many of them were of the brand-new cast across the states in England. The number is very close to zero.

There was a question: Should you cast talents and should you tribes? The numbers would be extravagant. Now, I'm not saying that the people who got the capital punishment didn't do anything wrong. I believe that they did something. But on account of the same crime, people might have got a 14 years or a two-term 14 years of charge performance. That's the difference.

But then the system needs to be fixed completely, okay? Based on gender, based on class, based on class footage and everything, right? But then still, I can still have a human being to point and say, "This guy has a bias. This collegiate system has a bias towards the rich, towards the privileged." The moment you take that out, what really happens? All those biases start intact without human body surfaces. So, in that way, I don't agree to the fact that things will change a lot if I have the system in place. I think things will stay the same. But I won't have to do much to do it.

But now comes the process. What's the exact? So, I am working on a project. It's a medical project that we are working on. And the question that we are asking right now is: How do doctors use AI? And doctors use a lot of it, you are found in. Like, they are literally chatting with the why is I have internal AI. They are chatting about diagnosis: "Why this patient came, this person has ABC, I gave them this medicine, what would be your diagnosis?" So, AI model will say something. They're very—no, you're wrong. In the process, training the AI better. Which is very stupid, because it might take your job with them. But anyways, they are doing some sort of game playing with the AI systems better.

So, the question that we asked is: What it does for human-to-human communication? So, what does it mean? Let's say if my father was a doctor, came calling a senior or a friend, "You know what, this case came? And I couldn't, you know, deal with this. I have given some medicine, what do you think about it?"

In Kashmir, when Kashmir was—you have to remember, a few years back, Kashmir went for immense lockdown around when the G70 was aggregated. It's a huge lockdown in Kashmir. So, how did medical work there? Because doctors couldn't work, they couldn't travel from Shiva to, let's say, Tyler and other places. It used to work by the principle that there used to be video calls, and that video call became a problem because internet was shut down. People used to call, right? And there used to be this community internet that they had in certain places. Police station, they would go and do this. So, somebody from Sheen Alert actually telling somebody that this is what needs to be done: Get them learned or operate it as soon as possible. We'll help you.

It was a very 3DS kind of a scenario. It's all drugar, I guess. It's possible because heroes are talking heroes. It's possible because that's a fuss. This is a form of social turbulence that's being reproduced every time we talk to someone.

The moment you take out the other people, and I interact only with the children, it confines my worldview to a single purpose. It confines my worldview from achieving anything or learning something from somebody's experience. Experience is not written rules. You experience things, you learn from that. Sometimes you don't learn from that. It's fine.

But when somebody says, "You know what, I was teaching this class and this thing happened," that person is not saying, "I punished the guy or the dog." That person is teaching me how to deal with it as a teacher. Maybe a chance people will not be able to do it to that extent.

So, my skill artists came to the conclusion that if we don't build a model system or attempt to build it, a model moral system—the system means a telegraph system—exactly what we said about the day, they will have shoddy, bad, private systems.

Your age, people who are right now, how many people people know who have friends who medical colleges? Just imagine: You using ChatGPT, what does it mean? Or you by coding, what does it mean? Google is going to take around seven days more or two months more to build something, if something goes wrong. What does it mean for them using an LLM model and learning medicine? Me getting treated for jaundice when I had typhoid.

It's a mechanical system, it's an organic system. The question then is: How then do we build in systems which are smaller in nature and which have these model connections to them? Why do we think about systems which can say, "I don't know"? I haven't seen a single element says, "I don't know." And it's very crazy because when I will say, "I don't know," to multiple things, right? Everybody, of course, would say, "I don't know about this. I'll try to find out." It never says that I don't know.

It knows everything or nothing about everything, or something about everything. I don't know. So, how do we moral systems? And why is it important in the question of the kind? It is in the symbol.

Morality means that you have social consciousness. It is in this morality that you define how much regulation a particular society governs. It is in this morality that humans still interact with other people, which leads to a complicated division of labor and thus social integration.

So it's an interesting question to think about. Now, how do we build this model? Which is model? Can you pretend that this is no model? Who's the model? And a system can only be modeled when it has the balance sheet in it. You can work with this. Exactly, that's the problem. It is being worked on. What you guys can work with—there's an entire Great parallel to that. What's the problem? What's going to be the roadblockless creation according to you?

It needs to—so, as you said, voters do not actively say that when you ask a question. They will say that very, very, very rare questions might have. But I know a set of researchers, a bunch of friends, who were working on trying to make models say no to the fact that they know to know in questions that they actually know about. That's a great idea.

The problem that I encountered is: how do you figure out if a model actually knows something that it doesn't know? Because at times it has the capacity to figure things out and still reach your valid conclusion. Because it wants to validate my emotions and my feelings. Actually, if it understands that I like the no, it might keep on saying.

But it's going to face another roadblock even if it's built. What is that? It's going to face another roadblock even if it was false, possibly made in the next five years. A moral system, a moral element, which can basically help legal students to practice law. I would love to do it and make it free to everyone.

What's the problem with Sudan? I was going to say, until you said, "I'll give it for free," it'll stay still in private hands. So it will still be, at the end of the day, if the guy who wants to—let's say if I'm an ex-company and I own that product, and let's say that my company is somehow taking damage because people are gaining knowledge into the system that I provided. Next slide, I can just say, "Well, shop closed. You can go back to your books." I mean, that decision is still in my hands.

I don't think even if I sort of thought about so much. The main problem is the moment it reaches the third-year mark, you would have private interests that would creep in and basically make sure you go out of the short floor.

Why do FOSS communities close in this country? Why don't you have a vibrant FOSS community? We have one to a certain extent, but then it's very dependent on corporate intentions, even here. What you can do and what you can't do is based on investor, right?

Mozilla, kind of an open-source group, or Linux group, was very active in the 80s, the 70s, and the 90s. If you have 2000 straight, why would this be done at that time? Because obviously it is a lot of—what are you saying?—barriers. This is the market. But I don't know.

If you think about text auditor, this is where text auditor should happen: at the welfare. And a lot of tech, that you have trust in a system which can say that. And the second thing is, it always comes with this caution: the conversation that we are having is strained on this kind of data and this kind of—basically, let's say that it was trained on 12,000 books. At least declare those 12,000 books. Maybe people will not check those 12,000 books, but the fact that you're declaring gives a sort of confidence. It gives a chance for others to come and verify what books they are doing.

But that's a big issue because I don't think it's a problem. But trust is the costliest thing, right? I mean, if I've gained the trust of someone without revealing the 12,000 books that I've used, that's the costliest thing that is possibly in my position. So why would I—the costliest thing is not trust. The costliest thing, according to me, is the idea that people would therefore be lazy rather than gain any kind of authoritative source or space to buy products and services.

It absolutely works on that level. Trust is a byproduct that might come because I just think about it. Rather than go to the library, if I can find out what has been written in the new alphabet book, my mother, and something in the book has come out of it, why should I go to that library? If it can tell me what it can do.

How do people care about the legislature? So your trust itself can be brokered through access, easy access. That's the other problem. They said that—who's saying what? Now you want to know, I want an obscure level of rockos being set there. Not exactly who said that. That's why you have AI hallucinating on your photo paper that looks on.

Because it gives you a, it has a lot of Associates on the level, not at who said what, but maybe this was said there because these were the kinds of people who were. And you have some. Anyways, we digress.

In the software we have on the cluster 4, but next week we cover time after level. We'll get to go into faster stuff than you have right. So make sure that you have read the additional fast separate how many read the interruption level. But even if you didn't read the introduction of that, you need to definitely read the text, the original product.

That's impossible. Yes, I should do that. Before that, you know, I will discuss it with all the two individuals today.

Let's start with this idea: who has questions about the purple form? I will send a remote code. Who has questions about the period formula? Let's start with that. Individually, I spoke to everybody about the form. Do you remember that we met? Plus, every day, two questions. Let's start with that.

Yes?

The dates of each step, like one? So you could submit the mid-sends, if I'm not wrong, transfer on twenty-first, right? And when does it end?

Twenty-fourth. Twenty-fourth. You get forty-eight hours after twenty-fourth. Twenty-sixth, you have to submit.

S.N.

Yes, the 2,500 words got more SM. Twenty-sixth—sorry, let's do it twenty-seven, 6 a.m., because you people don't understand well—11:59 p.m. on the twenty-sixth. 6 a.m. on the twenty-seventh is the summation of the SM.

One week from then, on a particular weekend, we're going to have individual presentations. It's going to happen in this way. It's a class of 80. I'll divide it into four groups. Each group has to stay through the entirety of the presentation. So you don't have to sit through 18 presentations, but you have to sit through 4 or 5.

But you are in question, I think. That means that you, Shaurya, and let's say Yash and Jira, you are all in one group. You are the last person presenting. They don't sit through all the presentation recipients and go discussion. You're presenting individually in a time slot, you end up and you leave after the time slot ends.

Even when others are speaking, you sit there and you remain conscious. That's it. Do you have any more questions?

Did you status that pull from previous events in the context? Can one of you put in your, if you don't mind and you're okay with it, can put in your WhatsApp notebook? I'll just send out a proposal recommendation. Follow this proposal format. I don't know how, I don't know. So I didn't say this.

You come? Okay, I'll send it across. You'll send it to all of us. Just share it quickly. It's a how-to-write-a-proposal by some people buying. Is to whom she is well-known, and she does a fantastic job of housing. Please follow that because I will follow that.

Marketing. 2,500 words. The literature building needs to have 25 or more Java articles books. Media articles don't count towards that. If you're putting more media articles, you just have. Great.

If you don't have any questions, I think we will stop for a bit. I'll say if you're quite surprised, get—get—give you the time until our next class. We discussed that.

The second one is, I mean, we don't quite, because they're a real idea. We asked them to read it. I found on the source that all the buttons are.

Can you send me those? Is this awful? Mm.
