Cremation, yes, human creation. What else? Who think is a subpar population as well? What kind of company? Cleaners and CV is somewhere around mammals that you say cleaning, can I make sandwich work? What does intense kind of works that maybe you're in mines? I just say the minds as we both mind the both of the patterns work. There's another work that's very important. It is people who clean dead animals from the streets. It's a very separate job. So if you see that you have a catchment or cheap up, so I'll do that. Who takes it from your home? Well, how does it not be? What do you allow application of the cup? They need to be cheap. The cow seems to be up against death. If it's there, aligned, then it's to be up again. So they are going to be Armodia starting, right? So far in this animal was raised.

Interestingly, except for these two, all the four rest four is 100% Talit Community Scroll. There is no other community participation in this work, except for these groups. And even in these two, the majority would be from this community. Majority of 60% would be from this community. But the mine work will also have a lot of shit to attract people who work things like this. In construction, construction itself work would have people who do not have a micro construction workers. So do not have land in their villages, a lot of land. If you have a lot of land, then why would you go out villages? Either you don't have land, or you have a very small coconut land which is basically being worked on by your family members out there and you are out there.

Thus, as the individual, as the community which has the least amount of overall the size of their population in the country, visa with the wealth and resources, it's the Dalits. Thus you find all the Dalit workers in the construction workforce. And the interesting question here is to ask the resources head already usually tasked. So if you belong to a Kalit caste, what are the chances that you would have, let's say, chief house of Jamie? Standard kind of thing, you might need that for your agricultural practices. Well, it's a one recognition. What are the chances? And the chances are that for a Dalit farmer, the chances are at odds of 20 is to 1. Which means out of 20 people out there, you might find one Dalit person who holds that kind of a line.

So, why do Dalits go? The world has agriculture labourer on a per day system. When you think about what is the amount of resources held visibly, let's say, good, it's a very important aspect of economy. Land and wood. Again, those numbers are staggering. So, the question to be asked here: when people are saying that cost is medieval and people are able to move up slowly, we don't see a drastic change in the response. Said by the most marginalized caste in the Latin Panama Shadow. That's not the only counter argument to this can be, according to me, which I've not allowed, is that they are not smart enough to break this glass seal. There's only inherently, I'll say missing. That's why they're not included to jump up the ladder. But this is a very reductionist view of human beings.

Everybody is born with similar abilities. It depends on your social socialization and nurturing, broadly food, education. A video of this village in Assam. Where there were flags, you remember there were floods in this land. When there are no flags, the children have to swim across a river to reach their school. So they put their school bags. The big plastic they tie it and they go that side. And then they change their clothes and they go through.

Now, this entire visual in that sense, now the question is: tomorrow when that girl is, let's say, 16 years old and she's not good doing good in her studies and she's mad enough. The question to ask is that are you going to evaluate this person by saying that was she was dumb? Or you're going to develop or you will evaluate that person what are the capabilities and the capacities that this person did in the outcome.

Samadhi says theory of equality studies poverty itself is not about that somebody doesn't have money, that's why somebody is poor. They don't have life chances, which a lot of people have. That's why they're poor. They don't have such education, the school is far away, they don't get food. Only one time is an industry, you don't have hygiene as your body does. The malnutrition A B C D F and is definitely enabled by a certain kind of a class section. It is also enabled by class sector.

What we find here is the question of conjugate oppression in India. Class and caste itself creates certain kinds of ranking government of the world. Static condition. Thus, this inequality that's been created is called graded inequality. It's not about direct binding as a binary. This is the haves, these are the have-nots. The haves are a graded. That have not circulated. A certain class of habs you can think about. Let's say, you know that one of the Ambani sons got married last year or last two last year.

Do you know that? Have you seen videos of that parish? You haven't seen videos of the privilege? Why? Where were you? Under the sea or something like that.

Because all over, everywhere—social media, newspaper, wherever—if it's a public space and you're watching. Why was it the news? Like, what happened in the federal movie? What expense did they expense the celebrities? Operators, as much as it was possible, yes.

What else was happening in 2010? Many people got employment, yes. People got daily employment there because small schools was happening. What else was happening there for them? Yeah, they converted the local Jamnawa airport into an international airport, so flights are flying. Something else happening. So interesting. It is networking. It's not coincidence that at the same wedding there is Mark Supper, there is Nvidia Chief, there is Myrtle. There are PM officers all in that marketplace. It's not coincidence.

This wedding is also about the apps making sure that where is the next space in which they're going to be used or secured. So it's not about just the opulence under their page. It's also about this networking being out there in the public.

Let's say that tomorrow you're sitting in Jharkhand and you are a forest officer in Jharkhand, and there's a forest standard there and you are DFO there, digital photos officer. And then something, a request, comes to you that somebody requires clearness to cut down five or trees. Why? Because this is the 1st starting of there is some Agani product that has been sanctioned by the center, and you need to sign it off at the local authority.

You are in my way, you are not invited to the Ramani wedding. But you saw it there: the Alanis and their coziness with the power ABC. Itself, you know that you should sign here, otherwise there is a report that's going to come from their business. This is also a rather display of power.

And interestingly, it also happens using caste. There are certain kinds of opulence that certain castes can show and certain castes are devoured to show.

So yes, yes, that's what I was coming to. In one of the key examples from last year, in a marriage, a sort of marriage, they used G. You know what G is? G-H-E. They used heat to cook food. They burnt down the entire manager. I am not saying who was using heat and who was the thing.

In another case, a groom was going on a horse. He got beaten up and then he got lynched because he was no horse. In another incident, Mrs. Gujarat, there was a young guy who had kept long Mustangs. Again, he was become a Muslim.

The question here is that when we started with the question of purity information, when a Dalit family, community, or a land displays anything that is only supposed to be done by Napa, Class person, they are facing the wrong violence. This is to maintain boundaries.

So, in a very interesting way, who can show opulence, who has that kind of a clout that they can do this and still be out of jail? It also belongs, at least in India, this is very dependent on class food.

And if you see the NCRB data, fantastic data set to work on for the National Trading also data for it, it says that in all the hangings that has happened in June and India, you know what hangings are? People are hanging, right? The highest number of people have been—so, 1st, the dialogue class, then the OBC class, and then the number in the general country is very low in the USA country.

Now, you might say that it is them who do transgrade, but why? Why isn't it following if human nature is problematic? Why isn't it following the population difficulties? Basically, if there are, let's say, 25,000 people from Brahmakas, there should be around 20% at least participants. Is that good of Europe when it comes to this?

That is where the new question comes in: how does caste play out in today's time? And interestingly, it's not about—it's not about untouchable. Today's 1st days are in the arena of enormous. And here I think notice to be clear. What kind of a jobs and some do you get might be dependent on the merit. I'm talking about a job, not a seat in a college. So, it might depend on your merit, you get who inside.

But what kind of—because how you will be treated in that office might be very much dependent on the class content of the distribution. The interesting fact is that also your growth. How would somebody grow? It depends very much on the networks that you will be able to build.

Another important question to remember about tasks is: if there is such kind of a resource bifurcation, cross cuts from mid, then let's say I come from a business family and I start a startup. The chance of me succeeding is much higher than somebody coming from a village and from a depressed class and class partner.

Very similarly, an example without caste: let's say Aliyah Bhatt or Drankika Bur. They are good at acting, or it's just not about that time. From childhood, they have been seeing a lot of camera moving around that room.

They're so comfortable with the idea of that camera being around that room. It is a social capital that's built in you when you see your family members in this industry. And it's a privilege. It becomes a privilege also to be able to. Because your parents sometimes were A, V, C, D. You get launched very easily. It's just not waterfall. There's also different other sectors that just don't. So that is where caste might be helpful, to get in certain kind of contracts, to get in certain kind of spaces.

As I was talking about, was I talking about other ICE interview we had last time? So a lot of people actually go on to say interviewees something to be worse. Now, in a panel, it really depends what you're surrounding and where you're from. If you have somebody from that place with the same sort, then the chance of you getting through that in the group is very high. So it's not always about when and why.

Why is it not always not there? Because structurally, when we think about structure, social structure, I mean, there is not a voting out there. Below PRD, there is not moving there. The social structure, please follow this. Our understanding of social structure is it resides in the human cognitive species. We understand structures ourselves. I don't need to be taught a structure anymore. I'm very much shame to understand what the social structure is. And that is why there are biases in those individuals. Sometimes it is very explicit, sometimes it's very implicit.

For example, a lot of people don't get PhD when they look at people who speak English. In all the IIs, they don't get it just because they don't speak good English. And what was the subject that they have applied for? A PhD map request. How does the sample? I don't know. Now, why does English matter in this constitution? It matters because English is a symbol of prudence. And I resonate with that principle because I love the protocols.

So, an argument that Daryl Dov and others make is casting the symbol itself is still present, sometimes explicitly, sometimes implicitly, in Indian economy. And two authors who are very good at this, and I guess I'll give one of the essays of these authors in your exam. She argues that caste is an important variable when it comes to life chances and opportunities in the Indian context. Task don't negate it as the is gone, it doesn't matter. And the chief economist, so pure economist.

The other important part is politics. And I don't have time to much dwell on this because this is the real itself, the subject itself. The way caste influences politics today is not what our software calls the best organization of caste. The way politics happens is it happens to an idea called mind-born purpose. Identity political. What is identity policies? I mean, what is identity? First, when it's not identical, this is what's identity.

So first thing is, do you have one identity or multiple identities? What identities do you have? There are several of them. Name, I have changes that I. Is your name an identity also?

Why is the import identifier doesn't allow us to be able to do it? So it has to be identically something that has a group at least there. It cannot be something. I like music a lot in activity. But certainly goodly attempting. Yes, starting to play an idea because it associates with the class.

The question here is that I think the politics means that, without trying to make any structural changes to the society, you're trying to accommodate people based on his own people. And there is an issue there. Let's say I say that let untouchability be there, right? What I will do is I am going to create segregated spaces and the people work everywhere. You understand my question? Probably questions.

I'm saying let there be untouchability, and because it's untouchability, that means that people want to stay away from each other, right? So certain groups, certain bases want to be there for that community, and there are R and E now. The problem, what is the problem here? What's the issue? And do we have an example of such a thing in the history?

Yes, it's in the Appropriate States that we reach. Where do the market spaces belong into a certain race? We are doing that. And in an avariced state, what is the problem of an avaric state? One is that it's original, marginalizes according to race, but also possible. Hence the grand philosophy is coming for French Revolution, which quality, fraternity, and liberty. Last, you don't have that. And then modern bombs you shouldn't have done.

The other thing that can be done is companies celebrating Pride Month. You know that? The Stripe one, right? And you will see all the companies all over the world, they won't have a flag from the 20th floor to reach their 2nd floor. But if you think about queer people from the queer community who work in these cases, it has their name disruption.

All of them would say yes to it. Or if they're openly queer, they would disapprove. So this, what we did right now, is either three or yes. You try to cover a dotted apple with fake red paper and say, “This is still fresh.”

Some of the pushes that started from early pushes was, first of all, inclusion. That is where DEI comes from: diversity, inclusion, and equity. So, DEI lines, when we say that, what does it mean? Have you got all this DEI in India? What does it mean? Yes. Not represented in that space. Everything is mainstream. So that itself was to accommodate people there. But did you manage to reduce discrimination of those items? The answer is no. You are accommodated, accommodated for sure; you are not being able to change the structure.

In that kind of space, what happens to politics? In Indian politics, party politics, caste itself becomes a weapon through which people are just looked at as vote banks. It is of very importance, very difficult to fit across the political spectrum that the caste system stays, and that's why it's not a good idea. Because what's going to happen if you vote because of your caste? I always know that this family will always vote for me. Because what he said, I know there's certainly people of that I interview all.

In the 1990s, when Mandal happens, one correction happens. Even before that, caste becomes a weapon through which political mobilization gets done, not to annihilate caste, but to make sure that is a way through which more banks are created.

And obviously, you understand that the problem is we're not talking about the types of inequalities that exist. What we are talking about is can be atomic. That's it. Can be atomic. Which means the structure in itself, and that's why I think Bhagavad George Moore was right. Again, like Marx, it is very utopian in its belief that this cannot be done. Maybe it can be done, but no clear solution of the world.

What is the highlight of class movement? I don't have to know. How to do it? There is no problem. Do you have any questions? I know you already have questions from last week, but do you have any questions? That means you have to be in a high-speed classroom or SM, whatever. Good, meet them now.

That's what's your—yes. Up to DEI and identity policies, is there any way to better accommodate life-represented people without being so? That's what I'm telling you. For the PIE or this kind of politics, it is very important to do that even at a symbolic level from the point. Because if you stop doing that, then those faces will become bad, of sort of time movements. I am saying that it cannot end there. That's not the end goal. Because even while you are doing that, the structure stays alike, the stratification stays alike. You are making people principle for. Sure, it's still impossible. But it's not doing the flat.

Yes. So I get at the end of the day, fixing it is—it was impossible plus it gained bicycle. The capitalist system viewed as a law because the other existing philosophy, like nobody is having equal play base, but the opportunity of me to get into an active state is the opportunity is equal to that of this.

Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And that's why, even if you think about it, you know Super 30? What about Super 30? A group of people. A lot of the students belong to Dalit communities, right? And most people could just see one thing, and they have said this opinion. They're like, “Why do you come back to me? India and Waltham.” They say, “No, I don't know how to do it.” A lot of them have run away to the US and other places, and they are settled there with their families and work because they want to run away from the caste, and they use capitalism as well.

So a lot of people criticize the Al Sai Rambhir for saying that, “Why are you saying that English is so important?” Of border colour language. Bausen is saying that it's not possible within your vernacular language to get a social mobility that English will give you. What mobility does English give you? Being a participant in the capitalist economy. So it literally is a way to escape this.

That's been—so how do you do that? N class is to escape and make it relevant? No, but if you will escape it individually, how do you escape it with N mass in Windows? That's the question. That is what changing the structure is. So that's why it's a utopian thing. I really like what Blausen is—but how do you do it? But how do you think about it?

Just think about a venue English camera. And this is a legend true story. Somebody came and asked for a hostel first year. One of the parents came and said that—is it going to be single application? All managers said no, we want to share it. How do you want to share it together? Two for me, two for this is a diaspora solid. Okay. But in this video, it's easier to share it with somebody. I'm like, “Yes. But can I pay something extra and have him a single room?”

They're like, "No, it's not possible. Can he stay outside?" No, we can't do that. So, what do we do? Who else is there in the troll? That was the question. And this co-manager said that this is a guy called Dash Dash. The father was asking the question; the father was standing behind. The father moves his ship and is like, "My father, my son cannot see this person." They haven't met the person. They don't know who this guy is. They can't see this person. But, you know, we don't know people from their community; we are very uncomfortable with that. Obviously, they are from the same state, that's why you understand the caste, otherwise they wouldn't have understood the castle on the roadside. And there's a huge thing that we happened to do.

Finally, I don't know the scope. Might be he would not talk in the film about similar things that have happened based on religion in these groups. Asking for post-groups where somebody living in that room is not from the religion of what the pastor is. And if you were to revert back 20 years, then the hostile people themselves would have this dimension to move. I'm not telling you.

So, are you telling me if your entire batch doesn't have a structure of class when they're meant to look cycling? Less and lesser than the other. Let's see what they can do. But then, if you observe us as a group, we are less likely to point out. I'm saying, so what everybody will say is that caste performance, if there's something called class performance, it's dedicated to certain spheres and performance.

No, but then, if let's say today, if you see Gen Z as an observed group, people are more likely to be interested now than Gen Z. Okay, my question is pretty simple. What is the age group we are talking about? What is my age? Is everybody around 90th class? Somebody, how 20? 20? Just 20. Okay, so 19 to 21, let's say that's the age group that we're talking about.

Let's have a conversation. It is possible, as Chaku says in the three videos, after 10 years. And let's find out about your marriages of the 10th century. Let's see if this generation can break out of this push towards the end of the world. Maybe it was that or not. But to imagine that this enunciatory thing would happen, coming from somebody's inside, it's insane. No generation has been able to do that until there has been a movement. They showed either cash or money. So you see how to take it and make no money.

Yeah, I absolutely understand that class capitalists are talking about it, right? A lot of you, most of you, I'm sure, would transcend caste a lot because you all will fall under a certain class. Your class is from the given people. And the interesting part is that if I'm unaware of my caste, it means I am looking at this one. I didn't know about my caste till I went to college. And no, because that was our caste. What do you ask me? Because you will only realize your caste when people are asking about it, talking about it, dissipating with it, right? It does not happen.

In my school, the first instance of me getting class is when class 1 results came out and there were some people who got to it, so we all sat on the plane. I also got admission into this boat guy, which is called Charakin or Moral or something. Patna. I didn't go to Patna, I don't know what, but anyway, three people got through National Law Schools: Calcutta, Delhi, Bangalore. And all my friends followed me. You know what I got through? Yeah, I know what they got through. Well, no, that's because he is a Naqi, which means he is from the part of caste. The first time I realized that there were people in my classroom whom other people started but other caste. I never realized it. That's why he's calling me to tell this. We obviously call them to tell you you got this admission because you are of this caste. You got free admission.

So, for a lot of records, specifically from Catholic, I don't know the rest of the— And that's how we see that in this class. I can translate it. I can also translate a lot of religious biases and things and say that I'm an atheist. People who might be very conservative, and they'll still stay quiet because there's something called liberal aesthetics and anything else. Places in which those liberal aesthetics and educates don't work, they're also— What do you mean? If your mother tomorrow, won't you ask help from God? This question cannot come to English purpose from anybody. So, that's a privilege of class.

But that's what I'm saying. That doesn't— Is that essential or privilege? Is that ascending, or is that simply just? But it's not transcendent. It's not transcendent. Because this rich from my class only, I modify that. Who is of a proud caste? She dated four people before she got hired. She's one of the best friends. I know about her entire dating history.

She never cared about caste. And the final breakup for the pickup comes. And she tells her, “Now I'm done with dating.” And the father is like, “Now I will search for a groom for you.” And the groom searching is on Shaadi.com, searching for a groom. And I asked, “Why this?” And the answer was, “If you are doing it, pay out here.” In the older times, I think you should also have trust.

And these are very privileged people. You can look at both: the parents are doctors, and the father's a banker against a Dr. Very privileged, very learned, right? Absolutely not conservative in other ways.

So these are the contexts that we keep on going. That's what I'm going to say. Okay, Akamusha. I think a lot of part two questions on the answer, but still, read the question. You and Aghilabh asked that question. I think. Let's go on.

The end is this sort of back to you, right? So you have an option to ask any question or no one question. Archae old question or two questions? You mentioned Karna and Karna and the Arctic. My question is, which of them is something that an individual gets by birth? And it explicitly states some computations which turn untouched, and a reason is even the unique. Because I am helping reduce the impact of paste cancer, and some low-caste individuals also affect each other because you become particularly disabled.

So you have technical mechanisms to eradicate paste system and anybody. It's pretty interesting. That's what you said, right? Some of the things that Manan are doing, so giving the operating level. They both have different insights.

What Bhavita writes is, Vardha itself is an ideology. It's an idea. It's an ideal: that human beings came out of different parts of home. Maybe in southern part of India it's Vishnu, in the northern part of Brahman. Just check where, which, in which part of the body is the best. From different castes emerged, right? That's the question. And from—and what is the name of the god or the god? It's not if the god is for sure. Which god? Oh, you're not searching. Okay, you're searching. Anyway, whether it be Vishnu or Brahma, Vishnu Bhar Brahma and the other person, Shiva, they're all the same in US still.

But the question I'm putting last year, it's an idea which is important. It's an idea because it's saying that the Brahmins came from this part, right? The Kshatriyas came from the upper part, the Reshas came from this part, and this part, the solar device, where Shudra started.

So what you did was, you literally showcased an RRT scale with the human vote. If you get hit here, you will die. The chance of you dying, if you get hit here, is lesser because it can miss the heart, but it's still dangerous. If you're hit here, the chance of you being alive is higher. Thighs again is higher.

Important are the human words. That is with the Ramasampa, ABC. But our Sama Mekar says this is not really—this idea cannot be operationalist. There has been operational logic.

For example, let's say you say that I will produce a software, an attendance software for universities. So who do you need? Let's say you need a developer, you need a tester, you need salespeople for the taking, and sales and marketing. The fourth person you need is somebody with finance, right? What you did right now is creating a learner system. Broadly thinking about the task, how do you put it in a pipeline? That is the sociology. That is where chanting contributes.

So when you're born, and you said, “Which gives the opportunity by birth?” It is Jakira. It is the division of labour so that the division of labour in Indian society continues unhinged.

Yes, it has to be. I'm not working on Bhagavad Gita. But because what we see tied to honesty, then you got to understand.

So my question is pretty simple. Just think about the three examples: keeping long moustaches, riding a horse. What was the other one? Game. Eating game to cook food. What of it makes sense that these people who did it have done wrong actions? Does it make sense in this time? Sure?

My giving this word doesn't make any sense, but it doesn't also offend you, I hope so. I hope it doesn't offend you. Who are the offensive mindset? That person you are talking about in the philosophical schools that you are talking about might have done something, okay, doesn't go to hell, put in behind bars. You already had jails.

So what you're saying is, you're trying to tie attributes to a certain caste system. You are basically marking a cultural group. You want the individual, right? That's what you can—well, Siddhartha was talking about. It's about, if Apple is about to say you don't have a group, you can transfer group to the individual. Metal is possible. Why is it possible? Why do you want the entire community to live outside the—what does it give you?

It gives you an appetite stage, it gives you a division of labour in which there would be occupation by birth, a monopoly of occupation there, and it's going to give you an election system. That was the idea.

And interestingly, which is not told to us, when you think about the monarchies of India, all jhatis, sorry, all varnas and japanas are represented at least once. At least there has been one ruler from all the Bhattas. What can't be said about the Dalins? There are Vishundra rulers, there are Vaishya rulers, there are Shanti rulers. Obviously, let me ramble, no noise.

In itself, what you now see is that the viral system in itself is still, if I don't have that jati at the heart of it, if I just see it open, like it's much more open a system, maybe this was possible through the exercise of power in a startup band in the world. But you have basically regimentalized it. And this also happened before the British was here, before the Roman was here. They didn't have power at all. Principally, something very insane was.

That's pretty cool. Yes, that was your question? Or any part that's like sexual.

No, that's okay. Even I'm not satisfied with this class system itself, so do you have a—who did you work with? Every part of the country is not. But we love. And any kind of answer, what she laughs at.

Dr. Anand poses that all communities and classes should come together rather than organizing movements concerning and raising issues within a specific group of individuals. Can this—I talked about class and caste functionality. Since certain sections or groups might have conflicting views from the other, also organizing a common struggle would imply or assume people giving up their class and class.

Yeah, it's most, most of the kind of intolerant of the other we can. But when there is some which transcends all this stuff to the dependency of the game, the field of it, and all of their game developers, if such a thing happens, then it would be working for them to address that issue. I just really mean some fluid or something else.

The main issue with the extract, or—

You never start our discussion about solidarity with today as the zero theorem. You have a history that you know. And that is very problematic. If my family has told me that it's that community that lynched your grandfather, I might be together in the process together, or would I be able to transcend that community?

It's an interesting story in Tamil Nadu, and that was a Khairanji incident. I forgot about this. Khairanji incident is an incident in which Govan Radha, Govan, a worker, she asked for an increase in ₹6 in her for the six months, just ₹6. What happened was that actually even raising the suggestion. So she and her entire family was burned up in the mountain. And this incident became a resurgent space in which a lot of caste discussion resurfaced.

The question to be asked here is that now, let's say in today's time, 20 years ago, there is the UTC now, probably UTC. What examination needs examination, right? Protests in Kambila, that is the state where they protest in Kamil. Let's say that no, you should have regional examinations and we should have regional seats, not have a CBSC-dominated syllabus for everything. That's wrong in Kamila. So let's see if both are better represented.

Now, let's say this coming people are in the fight. They speak Tamil language. The people who burn are also an expert. They also speak Tamil language. How does this correctly happen when you are sitting in the opposite? Out of the past. Because now you are neopers. That's why I always say I completely agree. There are moments of transcendence, and those are the spaces of hope.

So when I used to go to Shining Bang a lot, you know what Shiny Brink? Where China is, what is China? It was in the public step, it became a public state, yes. Case that was occupied, it protests the CNRC acts that was important. These people from Malario used to go along. Every month through the face, it went along for two months. I've been there like three or four times there. I stayed in the armies, we used to go along.

The question and the—

So a lot of people in all those sites, farming sites, were women, right? And women, a minority of women were coming there and talking about Aasa Mamita, was talking about Bhagat Sikh, or Labutara Lama. Five speeches.

And it was pretty interesting because, understand, these topics here, what happens here is mostly women across all communities. The question that was being asked is, now that the women are out in the parking lot as active political agents, they might not go back home. They might not feel anymore that their family and children aren't the only essential things in the world. They have come along. The aspirations for children are. They would become mass for political. Shying up ends. Would that be what happened?

But there was exactly what he said: that there was this moment in which a lot of people fell. No, majority of people, as well as for us. It is in those moments that there are opportunities that are there. So, John Reed has a beautiful statement that said that there are decades in which nothing happens, and then there are days in which decades happen. So those days are few rather than those events.

After your second question? Wait a minute. I will come back to you. I would go through this because maybe the second question here is somewhere. This is Siddhant and Manchu. After the two ratings, do you think the current reservation system should undergo major change or be abolished?

My suggestion would be: read Republic of Caste, Introduction Chapter, under the Department. This is what I was talking about just now. So, let's say a company. I have some LGBTQ, or an organization, I have some minority person. So, and it stemmed from the YouTube debate on the extreme justice. And I think, if you've seen it—I don't think so—your opinion is on?

Why do you want my opinion? Not opinion, person, but you can ask a question. So it's an open random question, isn't it? So everybody else wants to answer this. Isn't something that could I have an indirect context? I'm not sure what else talking about. Can we read the question so that everybody understands it?

So there was this debate between Shatik Prabhupada and the ex-Chief Justice of Kerina about whether about this reservation system. Shabaji, yes. I will say. Yeah, so basically, they argue and compare certain things on our reservation system today, as it literally as of today. So the roots of it, considering should it be changed, should it be abolished? Very, very broad question, but it's a pretty decent provision.

You know what? Now I change my mind. Classes can be abolished. But the ways are very useful. For the last 40 years, we have been debating our quite assets, the Parliament, the political parties as well, quite differently, IR side, didn't we disaster? No, exactly, that's where classes want to go. Because it is disastrous if you want to have a class census done in this country. It is also disastrous to say that let's not have a class census position.

But my question—but the question you can ask is, my opinions about this, are they smart? And again, that they think. But what he said is what exactly I wanted to hear through. So why do you want to hear some opinions of theirs? No, it's like saying that I believe something, please give me this consistent. It's like talking to God, right?

No, but when you think about the classes, the reservation, just the reservation is a task, is resolution. There's an issue with that, and I know the issue is. So I'm not a painful community. So I know, for a fact, a certain community came from Radsify. They are categorized as, like, they're literally the very poor most. So there are research. What has happened? The entire community has had two generations of occupational colleague, which is what IAS officers, engineers from IDEs, companies are.

The question of the Elbow raises us. And it's not my question, it's a question from a person from that community. I'm a scholar. He is asking that, yes, the reservation policy needs to go under—to go through—a change, but it's not what abolishing the reservations is doing. He is saying the caste system or caste reservation should be tied to the family. But caste resolution, you'll still have that. But you tie it to a family. Why? So that if a generation experiences social mobility, right, at least the next generation can still use that. You can only do that when it's marked at families. And you can actually value families, but a family has two generations of people in the government services, right? Or any other form of mobility, but maybe not services. They involve an isolation, these are—you can get into an idea type of space. And then there are social media and private sector. Should the contribution now get it? Is the question.

Now the problem here is, you will do this, great. I am in support of it. What is the guarantee that this guy, who is not getting a resolution, but his grandfather was an ICE officer and father is, let's say, a working prop—what is the guarantee that he will give me? The moment he will enter a college, people will not ask him advanced paranoia. What is the guarantee that his rank will not be asked?

And you know why ranks are asked in an IIT system. It's to understand: are you coming from a robot system? What is the guarantee if he loves a person, an upper-caste female from the upper caste? He would be able to be successful in that love.

So, in that sense, I can still fix the neighbourhood problem. But I don't know how to fix it. But that's the neighborhood. Look, a target for this change or policies that you are about to have?

Yeah, there are ways in which things that China and I completely don't agree with are. But that's what I want to tell you. When you have this cultural revolution happening, they are saying that the seeming to these differences and demarcations and marginalization all the time needs to stop right now. You will stop it, otherwise the state will come up.

It's hopeless. I don't agree with it. But I don't know how to do it. That's all the question that I have given Mahaparani.

Mahaparanandi's idea is very interesting and comfortable. He is saying that, exactly, the idea that let's attribute what occupation somebody does today to the burden from teaching. It doesn't matter what my father's class is. Get it open. So my occupation itself will be.

The problem in this entire thing is that this work is there to change now. This monopoly will stay with people not in the Varna system. This monopoly will stay beyond that.

So when Gandhi talks about abolishing untouchability, he is talking about as if caste itself is a spiritual world. As if people need to realize themselves and they will change on their own. Why would people change and be not casteist when it's a privilege of people to be casteist? Why would a man change if it's a privilege to be patriarchal? That's a question to be asked.

Then what do you think?

Exactly, but there are people who can leverage it, that people benefit from the.

So, how do you design this? That's what I'm saying. How do you design our first question? I know the blog post proposes anything, various issues and addressing them as one revolution. However, is that really reasonable within one's populations in which issues isolated issue and severe population issue?

Yes, I completely agree. No, it's not. It's a very difficult sense.

Aniket and Krish—oh, sorry, Rakshita. Is it possible for a class foundation and caste inequality revolution to exist in the normal political electoral system? I was arguing that it's not possible. In this particular system where classes are core banks, it's not going to be possible, because people have privileges that people actually take from the individual class in this country.

Second question.

Huh? Yeah, you see it. Oh, you have this question now? Okay. I don't know if in recent case this one, right? I'll just read it out to sell it.

He mentioned about what I'll jaguar. My question is, which of them is something that individual gets to evolve in terms of this and explicit states, some combination. Term untouchability. Why does this avoid untouchable work? I cannot. I hope it is not followed today, but I am not sure.

And in recent days, even while architecturalism, racism helped in reducing—I'm sorry, Marxism helped in reducing—the impact of class structure, and some low-caste individuals also find the lander, become political leaders, still have negligible interest in the radical class system yet.

So there is interesting. Interestingly, a lot of people today in the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha who are touching their peace. They will never get to come to a higher shape. They will never come out. They will never, at our data, think about the world. The country that are getting less patriotic when you talk about us for.

And then there are also MPs who won't shout their lungs up. Some Tamil artists like that.

Chandra Shakar, there's an enemy called Chandra Shepherd Magin in Uttar Pradesh. He is very vocal about the management of classroom. But a lot of them are not vocal because it protects my protective language.

Why do they have privilege? They have privilege, but they ask for being a Dalit. They don't have any privileges.

No, not being a Dalit. There is no privilege. They can empty their pivots, that's what I'm saying. They have power, but just empty the aliens.

Yeah, but they will not do it because they lose their seal, empty seal. The privilege is coming from the past. It's coming from the seat.

To one who loves that seed, I say something that might offend your orders.

Yes, where she said a company, and if the height company was, you know, but then they were asking because it's a backward company. Yeah, so it's a particular, but then she was like, just because I'm like a backward, all people are conspiring against them.

So somehow the negative promoted the other backward-caste people to the request. If somehow she included the backward caste as why they are going to work. Yeah, so she delayed her and cast her.

That is going to happen, right? For example, even some of the academic institutes, you have a lot of cast-based slurs in place by packages, right?

In certain cases, yesterday I saw a video. There is a girl who is standing for an ABC seat in the DUS circle, and she came to a podcast. It's very interesting: the student actors come to podcasts. Nobody cared who you were.

Now she comes to podcasts, and there's this fun section, right, where you have a name of a personality and you're supposed to say something. From Coffeebook Party. This entire podcast culture comes from Coffeebook Party.

Now she's asked, "I'll tell you names; give me your 1st response." Is this Saurokas? You know Saurottas is one of the CJD persons, right? Journalist from Taliban, also studying law, things like that. He's like, "I don't see about it. He is nice there."

Then they ask Ragho Chattani Saskatoon. At some point, he says, "Avi thinking." Do you know who Ajit Indians? Her response is that very sad things you say, right, but I tell myself that he stay about. It's not so simple a business. His caste is also this. This is literally the way a caste frame works, and that's it.

She has not met him ever, and she acknowledged, "I have not made anyone with me." Why don't you say something like that to anybody else? She said that because people—so I'm saying that it really went through it, because you're talking about the case people, and that's where a lot of people become. Even if you talk to people from the queer community, right? They're very possible about what is going to happen.

What do you think about it? If Sitan is here, it's a kind of conservation that's nothing more than, if say every dhamma means Saddam Dai Sahab, every dhamma meets Saddam Dai Samaritan. Now after five years, if I pass by him and do this, he's nothing, I'm gonna stop. You're used to that, right, also. So you feel that I'm gonna stop it. So that's why at this happen to the Lama Karl.

So, Lama Kar? Very interesting. You know what Lama Kal is? Has anybody been to Lama Karl before? All of you should go to Lama Kar. It's a beautiful open space in Aykabad. Serves beautiful, very good food. Very cheap food. It's a great place to hang out for hours, and nobody's going to ask you, "You know, what can you do about it?" And there are talks and music and plays and all things. Free for all, okay.

In this space, I want to walk out. So we were—I was—my all my friends came to the street in a movie. And she herself is in there for me, her side is sitting in the watching.

What happened is that on that corner, there are a few young people sitting, a bit older than you, very florish. This woman, this old woman there, looked violently to me. I don't know, I have not said so. And that person was sitting there, and there were two people sitting there, and I could make out that they are basically cleaning pot in their night. In the cleaning pot, sitting there in a couple of days.

And I was just—that Lamar is such a space that everybody has a problem with. If somebody takes a photograph or something, they will close the Lamar. Either he will come. That is my goal.

So I watched a couple of times, then I also went and told the manager who was there. Now, you want—I just asked. I don't know what the analyst said.

After the show is over, I'm just going out. This girl comes in and she's like, "Why are you going? Why do you care for me?" She's like, "No, you were looking at it." Then I had to tell her. He actually was thinking what I think objectives. I was very concerned about this person.

Now, the thing is that she, whatever, I think she was a little bit more than—she thought it's being perceptible about this question. Because I'm sure people look at people in the circumstances. And I don't believe that. Because I have to say why I was doing that. And I also thought I had to handle the problems. Please don't do it in the comments.

Because, anyways, this is where, for us, we are disclosed to where to do it. That is the result. So that is what my company is: that it's also a perception. People are telling me something else to my perspective.

Now, the other way to ask is, is this sometimes a strategy of, "I'm not going to do that"? Because at least when we come to these four professions and people are doing it, they can't do anything with this idea that I will use my caste marginalization to make something of my life. They are not in a way.

A couple of more questions I have, and what is Ayran's other question? I think it's pretty similar to Archae's question. False ones also Arnold talks about the caste census as an attempt to rejuvenate caste revolution. The parties came into the anti-caste are campaigning all in support of caste census.

So the 2nd part of the campus sensors, the caste sensors, is not people pushing because it will help in the new plan for its own. That's not what it was about.

The idea here is that people want to move to its exact resource. This is basically being calculated from a lot of from the 1970s onwards. Thinking this is with the inflation, does this not happen? We don't have data on which caste holds how much. We don't take that for data. That's why the task needs to be done to understand which task holds what kind of resources in space-time, so that then the task reservation can be reformed.

A caste sensor does something that you can do.

Yeah, so the British here, they are doing not only a caste census, they are also doing a tribal census, everything. They just want to have numbers because they want to rule, and they want to rule through the idea of what's it called, divide people. So we always say divide-and-rule policy from religious only about religion; it is also about class. Because certain tribes and class becomes if you—and all the swimming tribes are fighting a battle against the villagers for independence. So it is for this reason the Namas are important to the Lamas. But that's not the case in place now.

Do you remember? How are you aware about III D's popularity today, modeling? Triple I D Macrabad's popularity today model. Is everybody aware? I think you people should congratulate people in your hostel that finally we are dead. But we have been very famous, and for I don't know the right reason or the wrong reasons. Now everybody is calling me an answer.

But what's happening in your college? Like an act that was cited is a 1952 act. Doesn't matter what happened. And it doesn't stand in the business. Because nobody was saying it was so. The citation is wrong. How about that?

Yes, I was asking that, like, where do we know when to draw the line in caste discourse and just implementing policies or something about caste, that it does not contribute to maintaining the cost structure.

Good question. I will very honestly tell you that this question about policies—the problem here is that right now we have an idea of one policy fits all. And when I say fit, I don't mean that they are class economic for them or for them class is invisible.

For example, let's talk about Monday gun. When Monday gun comes into place, the savings includes 100 days of work. That's everybody's work. If you enlist yourself, you have to get that work done. There's a minimum wage for that Monday dollar work to be done. And then there's the other that happens from 15 onwards, you have a DVD transfer. So the money reaches your bank account directly, you don't have a middleman, you don't have to go somewhere to apply that account.

All of these things have been done by the Government of India across those two regimes to reduce leakages. The problem with the Indian system is that this policy considered something in which there is no intermediate, there is no legal system. The problem is that there will always be an intermediate work. And how is intermittently worked? One day you are englishing in some way. Places doesn't happen to individuals at all.

You, as a subcontractor, take thousand people with you to the DMS office to say, these are the thousand people, write their release. And all of the ATM cards of these thousand people stay without. The same thing is happening, but the government says that there is no legal strain.

Now, how do you solve this issue? It's a question that they do not have a right in.

In one of the places in Bihar, there is a guy who literally is. For each interview and came back to India that I am going to make latest interview all around here. And fantastic IIT Partner Professor worked a lot about translation lines APCBD. What he tried to, after a certain point, he said, let's say that this is a transmission line, right? So, if you know about transmission lines, they carry it from A to B, but in between they are divergence. So, electricity beaming in sort of the rules, right? This is how electricity drafts are speeding.

What we say, what they are seeing is this eroding is happening fine, but after a certain point, is it lagging? Maybe because it doesn't reach this point. Next shortcut, they go there. And they find out that there are villages here who already had electricity. They are actually cut, basically, use of remote power from this place.

Why do you need more power? Why do you put up industry there? We don't see motion machines there. Why is that? Because these people are very angry. Why would the Dalit communities live in here and get the electricity? They are angry that a Dalit village could have electricity. That's why they were ready to keep power, the power they don't need.

But what can policy do? Design your methods. Design new ideas about the two options. This sleeping water I'm sitting, let's say, with—as a sociologist, what do I say? How will you solve this? Put them behind guns. You are going to have a similar problem again after 20 years, 10 years.

But this is the difference between your policy and the practice. It's absolutely a gap that is there. And that gap, so that's why what we say is, if the government spends 100 rupees, and I would say that if the government has 100% intention and effort put in, it's only 50% that actually reaches the market. The rest of it is going away towards excellent reasons.

The same way happened to other questions. Have I uploaded a paper and C Ahmed A or B? It will be under satisfaction. Is it the picture of the book? Yes, is there? They can have a lot of room.

So that's one of the last thing that we do for this class. That's the Saturday. Saturday, same time, right? Because two students are doing—you have Saturday class because there is Friday-Saturday school. So there's also, I mean, tomorrow, because they make some. Indeed, if you don't have the best infrastructure, you can have the best. So you're done for that.
