What does it respond to me? Study of knowledge? What does that mean? The study of knowledge? How we gain knowledge and what kind of knowledge we value? What do we know and how do we know what we know?

So, the response itself, I'm interested in because what this response here does, it gives rise to methodologies. And it gives rise to disciplines. Because the question itself, how do we know what we know? How do we even attempt to know the question itself? Is where disciplines would come from.

So sociology as a discipline doesn't arrive because there was a genius like Newton or Einstein. It arrives because it is a certain, it arrives in a certain social historical moment. And the social historical moment itself has its roots in what was happening in Europe in the previous 200 years.

The first question I have is, have you thought about this movement that happened in Europe called Reformation? Have you thought about Reformation? Who hasn't heard about Reformation?

So, Reformation itself, if I'm not wrong, is the 16th century. I might get dates together there because I'm not a historian. 16th century. It is basically a resistance movement towards the authority of the church.

Was this before or after the Renaissance?

No. Just check the dates once. I will talk about Renaissance also. I know this is Reformation, before and after. See, 1500 and then 1600 is Renaissance. There are a few other important things happening.

Like, over this, like, not happening.

Yes, we'll talk about that. Do you have the dates?

16th century. 15th century.

Yes. And when is Renaissance?

It's after this movement. 17th century.

Yes. So, the 16th-century Reformation is basically trying to—it's a resistance movement towards the authority of the church, the Catholic Church.

So, what is the Catholic Church at that point? During those days, it is a completely feudal society where the administrative power rests with the king or the queen or monarch. And then there is the church.

The king takes care of what is known as the materialistic world, the world of matter: land, labor, gold; where we work, what to eat. It's a way where you administer rule of law on things which are around the question of matter.

The church is not interested in the question of matter. The church is interested in the idea of the spiritual well-being of the citizens. What does the spiritual well-being mean? How does somebody have a good life so that somebody lands up at the gates of heaven? What should one do is the question that the Catholic Church is interested in.

If this mood started happening, it is the same time when the church comes up with the idea of the sinner.

Sir, is the spiritual question always necessary to get to heaven? Could it be a spiritual person without that transactional nature of spirituality?

You can do a lot of things with spirituality and metaphysics, but the Catholic Church is not interested in all this. The Catholic Church is here. It is the proof, of course. There are no alternate views there. You are a Catholic or else you are dead. There are two options.

Now, the question of the sinner arises here, which means, let's say there is a man, a very influential merchant, who is from Rome. That person travels to somewhere, let's say England, somewhere in England. And that person rapes a woman in England, in Manchester. And this person comes back. He hasn't said anything, right? The woman was from a much lower-class background. She hasn't also said anything to others, because she would be killed if she told, at that point in time, that she was raped, violated.

At this point in time, there is a baby born from this action. And this man gets to know about it. And this person is feeling immense remorse. Because from the church's dictum, when a baby is born, you have to take care of the baby.

What will this man do? In today's time, what a lot of influential people do is buy out the woman. If money—you take care of the child, this is the money that I've given you, you sort it out, I don't want to have anything to do with the child.

Now this man is tied to his spiritual quest for heaven. So this man will go to a father in church, or a pastor, and say, I have done this. And the father will say, don't worry. Don't worry about the child, the woman. You pay the church such amount of golden coins—that was gold duty that day. I will take care of your sin.

Confession is a mode through which you get rid of your sin. So just imagine, there will be so many sinners who continue doing these sins as if it's a mobile top-up. You just go and say, I'm not a sinner. You could wash your conscience.

But the question here is that the Catholic Church is working with the idea that everybody has a conscience, because everybody has to go to heaven. Without a conscience, you can't go to heaven. You can't have a conscience—that's possible.

So even when the Crusades are happening, when you're killing people, it's in the name of the Lord, whichever your Lord is. So the one you are killing, you are not a murderer at all. You're doing it for a greater cause. So God will understand you. God is also a holy God, in that sense.

Now, this church became so, I'll say, atrocious when it started asking money for everything. A merchant travelling from A to B, you have to give us money for doing this work. You have so much of land, the feudal lords, you have to give us money.

Reformation is a movement that starts off to find a new form of spiritual quest by a new band of people called the Protestants. Protestants literally were called the Protest. And the first thing it does is, and interestingly, it's not a people's movement. It's upper-class people against the church. The kings are also against the church. That's why we get the Church of England at some point in time.

The king of England says that, why is this person sitting in Rome, nearby Rome somewhere, dictating what I should do with my life? I'll manage my people. I do whatever I want. Who are you to keep tabs on my sins and my whatever sacred things I've done? It's not a sacred. It's again, if you think about it, it's not a class struggle as much. It's very important people fighting. But it has supported, a lot of people have supported this movement.

So you have a movement like revolution. At the same time, in the 16th and 17th century, there is also a development of something else. It's called scientific temper. Somehow, religion doesn't seem to answer all the questions of the physical world. For example, the earth is at the center and everything rotates around the earth. Why? Because God created earth. God didn't create Mercury, Mars, Venus. Since God created the world, we are the center of attraction. And everything rotates around the earth.

Or the idea that the world is flat. It's a vast, because you saw the world is flat, now it's flat. The Bible is written, it is flat, it's flat. Every religion would be saying that, nobody's saying that the earth is round, it's flat. All these people who are saying this, at this point of time, are becoming the enemy of the church. Catholic Church.

So Protestantism itself is linked to the idea of the development of scientific temper. It's parallelism. By the time the Renaissance comes, the 17th century, the idea of discovery and invention counts as Renaissance.

Before Renaissance, nobody used to call it Renaissance, but I'm discussing it. Renaissance itself means a new way of thinking, a new age, and it's spearheaded by artists across Europe. Whether it be somebody like Rembrandt in Netherlands, there's Michelangelo in Italy, all these people, and obviously there are other people in France as well, all of them, what they're trying to do, they're trying to reimagine something beyond what has been said in the scriptures. That's the idea.

In the scriptures, the earth, the world, the society has been described as something, right? They're trying to reimagine that, how it is. So when you see the Sistine Chapel, it's a reimagination of what heaven would look like. It was all words, but somebody painted it. Literally. It is, first of all, it is disallowed to do that at some point in time. It becomes that, the permission comes to perform this kind of thing.

But Renaissance does something else too. There's a photograph in Denmark in which we see there's a surgeon who's operating on a body. Again, when I say a surgeon, these are people operating on dead bodies. Operations didn't happen at that point in time. So they're opening up the body to study the body. This person decides what happened to this person, which organ collapsed. And this guy calls up Rembrandt, who's a painter. And Rembrandt is painting these guys into the operation.

The first step of what started happening, what painters used to do, you'll see this in the series called The Alienist, which shows them that. There are people who are selling corpses for research. So unclaimed corpses, you take them, keep it in ice at your home, some researcher or somebody who's practicing witchcraft will take it away. Why? They'll come and open it and see which part of the body has what it is.

This quest to understand the inner world and the outer world beyond religion, what religion and scriptures have said, is what the Renaissance was about. It only makes sense that by the time the mid-19th century comes in, 17th century comes in, we have the Industrial Revolution. The seed of Industrial Revolution lies in Reformation and Renaissance.

But interestingly, even though the seed in the form of idea lies there, what is the material base for Industrial Revolution? Where did suddenly, how did these guys have so much of money to build such stuff with steam, ideate, scientist in there, or James Ford doing it? Where did this money come from? When? The colonization that's happening at that point in time? Which colonization happened?

In Latin America. So there's a fantastic book by somebody called Eduardo Galeano. It's called Open of the Veins of Latin America. So what he's arguing is the Portuguese and the Spaniards went inside that, literally hollowed out the veins like the veins of the body, of the blood, and they remained open. There's nothing inside. It was a complete mayhem of that continent. All that went to Europe in the 16th, 17th century, converted into money which could be actually used to build this stuff. Industry made it. Industrial Revolution begins with a certain kind of colonization, and it doesn't end. Colonization doesn't end. It still requires a certain kind of pipeline to be open, to be one-directional, and that's why you have the colonization of Africa and Asia.

For two reasons. 1. They understood the windows, we know the windows in the north pole, the coal is gone from Germany and the Rhine Valley, that was the area that they were told. The coal was gone. So you require coal. You require mining to be done in these places, but there's something else you call these places to be. The market. The European market is very small. You need to sell your products somewhere else to gain more money. Industrial Revolution is tied to the idea of colonization. It didn't come out of nowhere.

Now, why I want to tell this story is really sociological. They're not process-oriented. Okay, so why is this a sociological concept? Yes. It's not a product. It's a pattern. Yes. Interestingly, you get MOCW at some point in time. Do you know the history of it? MOCW was taken by Thaliq and Angaraka. Okay. MOCW, I don't know whether this is still coming to consultation.

There's an idea of dialectics. Dialectics. Which means causation is not linear. All of us are taught and taught from childhood, causation is linear. A leads to B leads to C leads to D. Maximum complex, make it much more complex. 10 factors were leading to one output, and then this carries on. So the complexity that science adds is at the level of variables. But dialectics says it's not linear. Dialectics says that in a process, there is no way you can understand that this will be the consequence of this. There are feedbacks and byproducts there. It is a dialectical process in which history moves.

It is not that Renaissance caused Industrial Revolution. Renaissance is one part of that matrix. Post that, there's liberation movements that are going on in America, North America, and then also French Revolution happens during that time. All this then, the market value of capitalism, which means the trade with Asia has started. People are taking things like gold, trinkets, to the entire Silk Road, all is bringing money. All this led to something called Industrial Revolution. Multiple variations, but also something that cannot be directly related to this one time. We cannot say that by percent, whereas Renaissance had 20 percent effect of Industrial Revolution came from Renaissance. That's not possible.

It's one of the premises because what we are trying to look at the development of epistemology, it's the movement of the idea rather than just the phenomenon in quantitative terms. It's how did these ideas come into these epistemologies.

Now what does Industrial Revolution do? Industrial Revolution, the first thing it does, and we're coming back to the work economy, Industrial Revolution, the first thing it does is it breaks the feudal order. Feudalism dies.

Now what is feudalism? In the middle is known as the manor, M-A-N-O-R, where the feudal lord and his family lives. It's always a mansion as well. It's a hidden. This entire land is divided, this entire property is divided into smaller kinds of parcels. In each parcel, there lives a serf and his family. This entire thing is called a fiefdom.

The question that remains is, what do the serfs do? The serfs actually were doing agricultural work, the females. The females work in the manor. Interestingly, let's say this guy wants to sell his fiefdom and move to Hyderabad. Also because he loves Hyderabad, when he moves out to Hyderabad, he wants to come from Manchester to Hyderabad. What is he selling? What is he going to sell? The feudal lord is moving from Manchester to Hyderabad. He needs to sell some stuff and set up things here. What will he sell? The land itself.

Interestingly, when you sell the land, the serfs come free because each serf is tied to this land. Generationally, this one can't move out of this lot or this family can't go out. Humans were tied to a piece of land. There's also the concept of free presence in this time. They basically provided services around times when service labor was required and moved them. The serfs were tied to this manor and specifically this plot of land.

What did the serfs do? The serfs toiled. Two-thirds of what they produced goes to the feudal lord. He does whatever he wants to do with it. One-third they keep for consumption. Give them extra some time, they can go to the market.

There was their provision. They all lose. This is the system. That's why European society has nothing to do with India. In India, the feudal system is very tight. It's not tight to the idea of a village. Now this gets completely squashed with the Industrial Revolution coming to Bihar.

First of all, feudalism itself—remember, we should have heard about this—human society starts off with the idea of hunters and gatherers. Then it moves—I mean, it's known as primitive socialism—it moves into this feudal era with settled agriculture. Then it moves into capitalist society, which is today, and the idea that Marx and other people projected: we will reach socialism at some point in time. Communism is the last stage of this entire idea, but the next stage for this is socialism.

Why is this the case? Marx said capitalism itself is a progressive force. Everybody is Marxist, saying that Marx says, "Kill the capitalists," but he doesn't say that only. He says capitalism is a progressive force, vis-à-vis looking for people to live in feudal times. It freed people from land. It raised the question of—it will try to rationalize the progressive principles of liberty, fraternity, and equality. Not for all, but at least if it frees people from some parts of the world, that becomes an aspiration for others. So it is a progressive force.

Now the serfs and the families move away from it. Why? Because the feudal system is struggling badly. It has more people than it requires, and they come to places like—I'm talking about the English here, mostly. It's the same story elsewhere—in Lancashire, in Manchester, in England. This is where the textile mills come into play, and people are applying for a better life. You are freed from the land that you were there.

And second, just before this migration happened, again a social process, there was a huge famine in England. It's called a famine, led to something like potato blight. It's called that. And it's a pandemic that people die out of. So there is no need for food, and thus there is a movement towards the city.

So sociologists, like others, called the early 1900s—they are seeing that there has been this migration that never ends. People are keeping on migrating to cities, and cities after cities are coming up. More than cities, with industries around the city.

The question that comes to us is: How do you study these modern societies? Sociology starts with the question: What is modernity? And is there a scientific way to study modernity? This is a question that anthropology loves. Anthropology asks that I want to understand how people live in their context of space and time. So they travel to a tribe, and they'll study the tribal people. What is their food? How do they get married? What are the rituals, religion, living quarters, ABCD?

Sociology is saying that it's not enough to do this because people are moving. It's like the great migration in Africa. So basically, in Kenya and Mozambique, the prey eggs, the wild beasts, the elephants, they all cross a huge river. I think it's a famine also. And while they're crossing, there are lions, and in the water there are crocodiles. And this happens because the grass on this side has ended. There, there is grass. It's almost like they're witnessing great migration in the world. How do you study this?

Modernity itself is linked to the idea of freedom. What are we supposed to be, as from primitive stuff like slavery, like casteism, like what we were trying to do at birth? You're a woman, as I said that day. My ultimate achievement is the family and children. It's a primitive concept. Modernity is supposed to free us from that.

Now the question is: What is freedom? I'm not asking a political question. If you think about freedom from your experience, what is freedom? As I have understood, it's almost like the ability to move. Can I right now go out of this class? Can you people write credit to go out of this class? If I say nobody for one and a half hours, they're sitting there, put mobile on my tables, and you're not going to move. All of you describe this experience of this class as being authoritative, as being strict, as being high-handedness, as if it doesn't have freedom.

So the question here is: Modernity is linked to the idea of movement and freedom. This is what sociologists want to study. When we see freedom, we also study it as this or this locked nature of freedom.

Now, with all this thought, I'm asking this question: There are multiple sociologists that emerge from this idea. One of them is Robert Spencer, who is basically—his real life is opposite to Karl Marx's. And he says the entire human society could be understood as if it's a human body. The brain has a purpose, a functionality, the lungs as one. So like that, different parts of societies come together to make what is known as a society. So how do you see this?

It's an aggregation of specific groups who have specific purposes. And this is what leads to a functional human society. In anatomical terms, medical terms, leads to a functional human body.

What is the problem with this anatomy? A person like Marx is very unhappy with this kind of discussion. Organs don't move around in the body, so you're not... Organs don't move around? By moving around, you mean geometrical movement? The ability to change who you are, to decide what you want to do, where, in the case of an organ, once you're set in a place, in that place you have that purpose.

Maybe also there's a hierarchical nature to it, like we consider certain parts of the body more important than the other, things like the brain, the heart. To add to this thing, the system can still function with some organs being cut off, so you're essentially like... Somebody else will do their work. You get replaced. The question of replacement.

The much more interesting thing is why how much cancer matters so much. There are two people who are studying evolution at the same time in Europe. You know of one? Who? Darwin. What did Darwin say? Survival of the fittest. And? Evolution is a progressive process.

So basically, evolution is a progressive process. And there's a survival of the fittest. He gets this idea from how much cancer. How much cancer is saying that for that position to be the heart, let's say this is the heart of this ill, deformed human body, there's a competition that's going on between groups to be the heart. And the fittest group will become the heart.

Interestingly, somebody who was a toenail or the toe cannot fight for this position. There's a set group of people who are trying to fight for that purpose. Darwin is blown away by this idea. And Darwin likes survival of the fittest.

At the same time, there's somebody else. Do you want to say something? This is a metaphorical thing. Just think that it was replaced with something. The question here is that the other person who was working was somebody called Lamarck. L-A-M-A-R-C.

You should read this book called The Song of Darwin. It's about how one scientist is never remembered as the scientist becomes so famous, and it is not by design or merit. It is very much consciously done that somebody has got so much of accolades. It fits in the idea of a competent model.

Survival of the fittest. When Dawkins wrote The Selfish Gene, the first people who were reviews of him, ecstatic about it, were the brokers of New York Stock Exchange. Dawkins says so. He said, "I am not talking about humans here. I am not talking about fully formed humans competing and somebody winning. I am not saying that this world is a coliseum in Rome where two people have to fight or sometimes fight a lion to prove that that person is the winner. What I am saying is that there are certain behaviors encoded in the genes that survive. It is not about this human is fitter, that person deserves to win, the other person is not.

"For example, if this is the case, then all the premiers of the society, the prime ministers and the presidents, we should go to war. We should just let the home ministers of each country fight each other. Whoever wins, the other country steps. Survival of the fittest. Fight bare hands with just knuckles with each other. It will not happen because all of them are fittest. They are from the same class. The fittest class is the bourgeois class."

So, Marx is saying that this analogy doesn't work.

Now, post-Harvard Spencer, there are multiple people coming and finding the idea in sociology called multiple paradigms. Multiple paradigms of sociology. It means that to understand the world, there have to be different viewpoints, and each viewpoint has its own methodology. So, one of you can't come and tell me, "For me it is this. For you it is this." If you have not developed a methodology or discipline to research something, then it's not sociology.

That's why we have four schools. There are multiple schools. There are four schools that we talk about.

1. First is the quantum school. That is the Marxist and the post-Marxist. Or, in other ways to say, it is the disciples of Marx.
2. The other is interactionism. The people who decode the idea: why do people interact with each other? To what purpose? The other word that you know about interactionism very well here is networking. Networking is nothing but interactionism.
3. Other than that, we talked about functions. What happened to the school of Berkeley and Stanford?
4. And the last school that we study is the internet. That's the Weberian school.

But before that, now that we think the schools have arrived, the question that we'll go back to: how did sociology happen in India? It's a very boring thing to speak about this, but anyways. As I told you, the anthropologist, what he used to do is go to the place, study the people in situ, where they live, and only talk about the static, stationary nature of human society.

Sociologists do the first part, plus they also study the movement: how people move together, why they move, and their motivations. This movement is not just geographical. It is also social. What is social mobility according to you? What is social mobility? It can also be a group of people. Have you thought about something called Sanskritization? Sanskritization, where people from the lower class are now practicing the upper class. That is actually a question of social mobility. You try to leave the position that you are in and move up in society. How you become from the toenail to the brain, that movement is social mobility. And there's geographical mobility.

So now for society, it's now. But the anthropologists were very interesting. They come to the tribes of India, and they study them. And what they do is, you have a scale, right? So let's say that one of you has a small scale. Do you have a scale with you? I'm sure that some of you do have a scale. You have a pencil box? Yes, you have a pencil box. Pencil box. Can you open it? So, if you don't mind, can you measure the length of this iPhone?

6.5 cm.

6.5 cm? That's a 6 cm scale. In IELTS, to describe IELTS with the measurement of each of his body parts, and relate it to what he calls a social group. Let's say people living in a certain society, in Kota World. And I go there, and I measure everybody. This is called psychometry. The study is called psychometry. This is the basis of race theory. Racism starts with psychometry, where you literally measure people's body parts. This is what anthropologists were doing to the tribes.

Another way to say is that these people were immensely racist, immensely biased, and they didn't think that these were humans. They thought these were animals. And interestingly, till the 1950s, there was a human zoo in Brussels. What does a human zoo mean? In one of the cages, you find a child or an animal. In another cage, you find a tribal family from Africa. They were picked up and brought there so that white Europeans could come and see. Well, these look like humans, but they're animals.

This was how the study of anthropology and, again, colonization. How do you justify colonization if you say that these are humans? If I hit him, he or she gets paid. If I stab him, they die. You have to dehumanize these people, otherwise you can't do this.

Now, this is the branch where it starts. Now, this is the anthropological mode of study. By the time some of the same Britishers came in, stayed in the sense they're civil, they said that this is not done. We need to study people, first of all, by giving them equal respect as us. We'll go to the field and study them. And we'll stop all this bullshit around psychometry.

The sociology is there in itself. The other thing that's important for the rise of sociology is the book view, which is the subject of technology. Let's say I'm Max Muller. Max Muller never came to India. I'm sure Max Muller never came to India. But he's one of the best scholars of Hindu scriptures in Sanskrit. Let's say Sanskrit scriptures. It can be from any religion. How did that happen? The Britishers captured five to ten scholars of Sanskrit from India, put them on a boat, took them to Germany, and said, "Teach Max Muller Sanskrit." And they took all the books. Max Muller keeps translating them and saying, "This is what is India."

The book view. The earlier view, for example, what I do in the field, my students do in the field, is the view. The book view and the field view are at the heart of the development of sociology.

To cut a long story short, the first two universities that started teaching sociology were Bombay and Lucknow. During independence, they were interested in the question of the freedom struggle, but also in the question of the caste society. The other important two concepts that came in Indian sociology were the study of family and kinship and the idea of villages. The villages became the center of India. It's only in the 1970s that we have certain kinds of studies like intersectionality. We're going to read about all these things later. Dalit studies, women's studies, or chemist studies.

What I'll do is that this slide has everything. Be assured, mark it up if you want to do it. I'll also put the MPDL notes from which this was made. It's interesting stuff, but this is not really something you need. It's just to know important stuff.

The thinking part that we'll start now is—before that, I will talk about what do you need to do in terms of making the exam. The exam, the 16th and the 17th, they will be a portal that you can open.

What you are supposed to do, you are going to go and submit a topic. You will write, "I want to study this social problem, this social problem." And you will write 100 words on that, what you mean. Let's say I write dowry debt. I want to study dowry debts. It's a social problem. What do I mean by dowry debts? What is dowry debt? When I say study, it means two things.

Either you are going to find a system, or you are going to find a collective data. So forget about that. Rely, I would say, on media reports specifically, if it's possible, or do a good literature review on that point. I'm telling you how to do a literature review. But as of now, what you are supposed to do is tell me, what do you mean by dowry debt in this problem, in this project? That's it. In layman's terms, by reading from these students, 15 minutes. Since you are 17, two days will be there. If you have multiple things to add, let's say you have five topics, you can also do that.

I can't understand you. Yes, absolutely. Don't give me an answer. So each time you will write a new thing, you will write 100 words on that. How long do you want it to be?

So after that, after 17, in the last week of August, I will give you appointments across the evenings in the week, between the slots, safety club slots. Come to office, we will talk for 15 minutes, and try to help you work more on the paper, not write help you.

And then you are supposed to submit a 2,500-word essay on that a week before the next semester. And then when you do that, the minimum—now I'm telling you why this is not going to be a paper—the minimum word limit is 2,500 with references. If you don't know how to cite, ask your senior seller. You have to cite. 2,500 words. And add more. If you want to write 5,000 words, you're welcome.

One word of caution. If you're using AI in your research, you're going to get badly caught. I'll tell you why. After your presentation that you gave, you would have a viva, an in-person meeting. So please avoid using AI. Well, if you're lucky, if you're not caught, great. Best of luck to you. I'm sure a lot of people are not caught by me. But if I ask you in viva, you're on still paper grounds. So please know what you're writing and what you're saying during the presentation. It's individual levels. Do you have any questions?

The presentation is going to happen after your next semester. What are we doing? Two days? Ideally, we'll do it on Friday evening, Saturday evening, Saturday after classes. It's over and on Sunday. So you should be done in the evening. Do you have any questions?

Yes. What is your main ministry?

What is my main ministry? Oh yeah, so let's say that's 100 marks. The viva will be marks of the total. This is 40% of the total. From my side. That means 15% for your order. It's basically the essay is 15%, the presentation is 15%. But yeah, if you're found—if I'm understanding you used AI—you're highly likely that I'm going to delete 40 marks there. Again, just do this one more time. It's 30, and if I found that it closely does something, it was zero order. If I tell you the 30, they're not really anything. Any more questions?

No more questions. Krishna, any questions? What are you planning to work on?

I didn't get it. Can you again repeat?

Gender violence? Gender violence? Where? In what context? In relationship? In marriage? Generally in the streets?

So gender violence which has a stranger attachment. At the heart of it, when you think about the subject matter, it's a great subject. But within the subject. So let's say something that you find right now works on that. So if you pick multiple topics when you're presenting and make it a 15-minute talk, would you help us?

Yeah, that's the point. In those 15 minutes, you have multiple topics, you talk through it. In the first 2 minutes, you try to navigate just one. And then we talk more about it.

Okay, what we'll do now is, since we've taken this conversation, you wrote a mail about Devi. The thing is, if I book KRB and put up Devi there, the institute and the way we live in, it's going to be scandalous. So we've actually spoken to Cyclorama, is the film club that's there. They can do it? And they also do movies, so they could do it and then we could all just like... That works for us.

Because as a part, I was just thinking about it, the other thing that's very important with that is, how many of you are from the Northern part of India? How many of you are from the... So by Northern part, I mean above the Vindhyas. You know there's a range called the Vindhyas? You cross Vindhyas, you're in the Southern part.

You mean ethnically or where we live? Where we live. You live in the Northern part? No, I don't. So what I'm saying is that, it's up to where are you from.

I'm from the Southern part. Where? Agra. It's Northern part.

No, that's the thing that a lot of people would find cultural resonance towards something in that movie. A lot of people would feel that, what is this? Like our societies are not like this. But the interesting part is that every society has something that will resonate towards that movie. And first of all, you should watch or try to watch the 15 minutes. It is slow and forward. And watch the Devdas that I had shot with Nambi. I'm telling you to watch it, there's a reason for that. What does Devdas mean to the culture? What is Devdas?

What is the story of Devdas? Diwanthi, what is the story of Devdas? Panchkanya. Panchkanya, yes. What is the story of Devdas? Does anybody know what the story of Devdas is?

Yes. The story of Devdas is that he marries a woman, a girl from a lower caste—class and caste. So Panchkanya is a woman, and Devdas is a man who marries a woman. Yes. The story is that somebody lost the love of their life, became a drunk, and landed up in a courtesan's room. The courtesan herself, Chandramukhi, is trying to give him peace and care, but at the end he realizes that the pain is too much and he comes to his senses. That's the story. He got cancer. He got liver sclerosis from overdrinking, and he died. Let's say that.

Devdas does something very interesting. You should watch it because it does something very interesting. It's the entire world of masculinity.

Now, the question that we are here to study is the question of confidence. Especially if you think about confidence, it doesn't mean... Have you ever seen a fist-to-fist fight in Jivladikakalapa within the campus? Have you seen people aggressively abusing each other as if they could kill each other in campus? People live in literally a very privileged space.

If you were in, let's say, Allahabad University, the moment you go inside a hostel, your hostel allocation happens based on what? What do you think?

How does hostel allocation allow that? No? What is the ethnic-speaking language? He is saying something else. There will be the owner of the factory, there will be the board of governors, there will be the managers, there will be the group of workers. There will be division there. Forget about that. Much closer. Think about the IT company. Many people languish in some place. What's the hierarchy on the shop floor? There will be managers, there will be developers, there will be testers, and there will be a board of governors. And on top of them are your investors. The idea of individual ownership is not useful. It's finance capital. Some people are rich. So these will change.

Now the question is, why does Marx take these two classes? Marx is taking these two to say that human history itself is an ongoing tale of the class struggle. Think about feudalism, what we discussed. Who are the two classes fighting? The serfs and the people lost.

So my question is, two points. Marx, first of all, disagrees with the point that there is something innate to human nature. What does that mean? In these hallowed corridors, people would come and tell me, as a faculty of sociology, "But you know what, sir? Capitalism survives because we are innately greedy." Have you heard this? That human beings are innately selfish, and that's why we have to go.

I wrote the name of these people, the existentialists. Some of the people who are called Sartre, Sartre, they would say it is a very easy way to abstain from saying that I have accountability. The other thing is, "I am responsible for the actions that I'm doing." It's a very easy prison.

That is what was always said when a woman was dragged from her home, mostly drunk with alcohol, to the sati fire and burned. Same thing that you said. "You know, this is what our society is like. I'm not responsible. It's written somewhere." If it's written somewhere, then drop it and write something new. Take responsibility.

Marx is against anything that says, or even thinks or conceives, that human nature is something permanent. Second, there is something within us that makes us compassionate, that makes us greedy. There's nothing like that. Marx is simply saying one thing: it is the social cognition which shapes our idea. It is the material space itself.

For example, out there in Kumbh Mela, they will be deeply influenced by this place. You might not agree with me. How many of the students here think of the fact that they want to be writers, they want to write fiction? You've had a lot of people who say, "I want to write fiction." That's not a problem. But you've had a lot of people who say that they will just take music and die with music. You will find people such as you, nearly, very few. Why? Why is that happening?

It's impossible that so many young students in the college and there is nobody who is saying, "You know what? I want to be a rock star. I want to go to a stadium and sell out stadiums, 10 lakh people standing in front of me. Or I want to be a writer." What's happening? These material conditions, how you are brought up, the idea of engineering—it's shaping who we are and, again, who we want to be.

That's what Marx says: it is the reality, the matter of us, and then ideas. It spins Hegel in a different way. Hegel is saying—Hegel is taking the Cartesian way to say, "I think, therefore I am." Marx is like, "I'm not interested in this equation."

I'm interested in where you are. In which conditions are you? Your existence is because there are certain kinds of activities happening around you. There is a farmer who, six months before today, actually took out rice, or stretching rice, that came in a packet of Ashwagandha rice packet, which I consumed this morning. There's something happening there that fed me today.

Marx is into that question: You came, you are, how are you here? How are you living? How are you breathing? How are you eating? What are your aspirations? So Marx is these really different kinds of philosophers, and in this, what he's saying is that the struggle is about consolidation of matter in the form of profit. How much can I own? A feudal lord will do the same. According to the capitalist class, they also do the same. The mechanisms are obviously different. Thus, it's a continuous form of class struggle. That's why it's called a conflict theory.

Now, is it the best theory or not? That's a very different question. In sociology, we cannot ask this question: Is there a best theory? There are multiple perspectives to understand the world, and this is what you want to understand. While this is one activity right now for you, I'll give an example, and then you will understand.

How many of you believe there are wars in this world? Let's say the Iran war that was happening, or let's say the Palestine genocide that was happening, or let's say the India-Pakistan operations in the group that happened. What's the relationship between class struggle and war? Think about it.

According to Marx, there are haves and have-nots, and they're obviously struggling. Because the have-nots would like to have something more. If I don't have a shoe, I would like to have a shoe. Why should I live with the idea, as Thomas Spencer said, that, you know what, I am in this place in society, I have a purpose, go wear it all around, and let me be?

What is the relationship between war and class struggle? Think. Go out and do it in a group of four. Two people in each group. What's the relationship between class struggle and war? Please keep wars in mind. War of today or two centuries ago. Show me the haves and have-nots, and why is it this? By the way, this is a fantastic topic for your research project. I'll ask you for your next idea. Please do not use generative AI.

I'm not a conflict theorist. Is there a class struggle? Suppose the war is necessary. Is there a class struggle? Is the whole country participating?

What is the CGP protest? Again, as a skeptic, don't get those thoughts in your mind. What about those things? What do the news articles or our influencers tell us? Twenty students have come into the pre-summit because there has not been a leak. An exam in which lakhs of people, at least ten lakhs, it's at that junction that students are on the street asking for accountability. What is it? It's absolutely a class struggle. You're asking accountability from people in power and people with a lot of wealth. Because people with a lot of wealth, their children don't need to give them an examination. They can buy a seat in Johns Hopkins.

They are asking the question to ministers in Lok Sabha of all parties: Why are your children in the US, in Boston, and starting there, where my children are getting a fair chance in examination?

So, from a Marxian perspective, a lot of the class struggles are hidden in the language of protest. It's a war between at least two countries. The point that he made is very interesting: Whenever there has been—and it's historical—an olive branch from both sides between India and Pakistan, either there has been a terrorist attack within three months of that, or there has been a war. Always, from the 1960s to today, whenever the two countries came together to have a dialogue, there was some incident that happened. Jammu and Kashmir, the Bombay, during the Bombay and the Vajpayee style, they became very close at some point in time. There has been a terrorist attack.

Why does this happen? And that question is linked to something else, to what they have mentioned as a word: imperialism. And the other word is the military-industrial complex. Wars survive because an industry can profit from them.

Second, there is geopolitical imperialism that leads to some wars. So for Marx, most wars have class interest at the heart. They are not developing, and they are not only productive. Even the people who die, they have a question. Okay, we'll stop for today. On Tuesday, we'll do something that Marx said about this thing called alienation. Okay, sorry? Yeah. Okay. Otherwise, it doesn't. You people watch.
