So, where do we have to get the patients one? I just want to make sure that you're going to be able to do that.

Why did I disagree with subdivisions, segregation in society, whereas if you look through the lens of Marx, subdivision or segregation? So, who Hitler also understands the—what are the contours of capitalism, particularly in the middle of the—

So, he is saying that in modern capitalist society there is division of labour. And what is division of labour? Division of labour is that each one of you [has] specialization. So, in this production process, you enter a solid model with your specialization.

The interesting question here is that this is not segregation, but that this is basically differentiated skill set. What class system brings about is also at EOL, where this is division of laborers. You don't have the opportunity to learn a new skill set and do something else as a whole. That's what the state is.

So, let's say you were polishing the top of this table. In no way would you be able to learn how to fix the electricity of the steel, because you are bound in a monopoly of the scale and you would get a categorization of past there, a targeted class, whatever the task is across the log. This would be something different.

That's where Maker is saying that this is—this is not only—this is unnatural. For division of labour to happen is not unnatural. In the progress of production, division of labour has to happen. Even in the post-petition, the laboratory is not a— To a society, if you think about it, division of labour would be there. But would division of labourer be there? That is a question to be asked, because this is fixing your social position, economic position at the same place, agricultural issues, which is not the case. So that's why I commit the release.

Now, there are two people solutions too, and they are all uploaded too. One is the desired amount of demo or delay. The other paper is by Jonathan Parry. It's on suicide in Elias D. The Parry slides are already there, but I'm not going to talk about these important things.

So, is it on Moodle? Are they on Moodle? Yes. Can you see them? Can you send them on the Google? Is it Parry? There's something called Parry slides and there's a Parry article. They'll send it on the drugs now.

Now, Zari Nakameth is an urban shock profile, but he's—she's also a sociologist interested about the city. I am sure you have had a lot of discussion about this with Khaled, but still now, what—how are City of the City of And what I find is Paul to write about this is the collaborator of Carl North England, Eagles. And they say that there is this sea, CBD, the central business district, and around which the city grows.

So, for Old Delhi, this park used to be the Chati Chowk Cho Riversaro, those kind of area in the center business district. Dalgara towns, there's a place called Stalin, but I was out that city. I'm sure in Bombay, there are colonial districts, and colonial cities themselves have developed like this: that you have a central business district. It concentrates circles.

So, the people generally who live near these spaces are the workers. The people who own these spaces are the same businesses in the central business district, live generally in the world. That's the entire US in a market. That's also the actual amount of people.

If you work in Dutchman, it doesn't mean you stay in Dutchman. You stay away from that place. This is dingy, this is sort of crowded, a space, so maybe move out with Karava and those areas and large space.

So, cities develop like this, but the—what were Saturn's fears? The question we asked is the domestic health that comes to people. So, where do you see tomato workers stay? Wuta and deliver food, for sure. We have both stumps and partially there's a question.

They have songs. Where are you seeing the songs? In my company, there are great companies here. I didn't go there. This is the score? What is that? Okay, anything else we have?

Have you seen the road that goes towards—let's say this is total idea. I have got—this is your airport connection. And this is going towards mining space, I get city and all. That road was towards the New York. And this area is intranet. Shops and everything. Intranet is a pretty distance space, because it's the road itself. You see, as a flat road.

On the right bank of the road, right, this is the north. So, this is the right. Let's see, that's the direction we are going. On the right bank, you see that there are PGs there behind the places where the shops are. On the left bank, again, there are small lanes that open sky and right, and there are people who live with them.

The interesting part is that this is much more costular to live than Reds are much more cheaper in this area than the right. Your volunteer is in the job of fixing off of your personal job. There are shops in the front end of the road. And then behind, there are lanes cutting across in which people live. Right.

Why is this section for that? It's eased, so maybe like the sun is. Nothing to do with something. It's got to be airport. No, this is also equally connected. You have to come on the same road traveling. So does not have to this land is lower than the land. This camp. This is situated on a small ridge. So this is higher. This is elevated than this place. This area gets flooded during rains at the back. That's why I teach you. Because literally the roads will go down like this.

And this area is where this space, this space, some of these areas, which are not, which do not have right now any kind of construction happening, is a place where your sweetie cement work is sitting. The other is, before we go there, there is the right-hand girl also towards the pro-circle and the financial history. There is the Kurila Dochal Academy Hub. Again, there are some spaces here behind it, which is also where domestic helps and deborahs come and stay with.

What is important in this entire discussion, then, is when you have pre-processed building, these very spaces for upper-class people to reside, obviously to keep distance. They can't travel to any kind of school or the restaurant. It doesn't make sense. Why don't they live on the cheaper side? Isn't it more economical? This place. The other side. People live there. Nobody lives here. There are some quarters here which are cheaper. That's it.

Most things here, it's not good. You still have a cow shed there, a horse shed there into those areas, but these cow sheds and horse sheds are not used for cows and horses, but Zoatar Singhi bike circuit was protected.

Now, within all this, what we end up with is this finding that the character of Delhi is changing. And the character of Delhi is changing because city planning is changing at a certain point in time. And she is interested in this thing called the avatar. But what is an avatar? Cancers are spaces that the government actually runs. They have, it can be employees there. Some of them are employees, but some of them rent out places. In Canada, they are all in markets which are maintained by the government. The owners were not mentioned.

So we were coming to case contacts, right? So this avatar was the center of the CBD, central business district. The question that starts happening, we asked this. It means to move out. It means to move out by its films. Meet its films. And it means to move out so that sanitation can be maintained.

The question to be asked is, who are the people who are working here first, or who are the people who are working here? They are from a certain task within this army. The Croatians. To know more about the Qureshis, you have to watch Yatsa Boss. It's a story about the Qureshis. Now, the Qureshis are intergenerational equivalent that is into motoring meat.

First thing, the myth that gets broken down: the caste is only in Hinduism. Caste is mostly practiced across the region in the South Asian continents. For example, I was in Dhamma. Somebody was asking me this question: Are you a new? I said, I was born in India. Then he said that, but we are different, but we are the new. Because again, his English, this is the English. English people, he said exactly this, that I'm a Hindu or a different form. I was like, well, he's like, you people worship animals. For example, Ganesh people are not doing right, because I don't care. Or A, B, C, D, E. We don't worship any animal. Animals are filthy things, we eat them, that's it. So we are very different as Hindus.

But I ask them, do you have caste? They say, absolutely a cast. They don't want a cast. Are people who worship or offer pujas in temples in Bali, TR Dhammas? And there's a master suit. And it's in Bali, far away from the mainland area. So in Sikhism also, we find the question of class company.

How many of you know about this guy called Rao Review? Why do you know about Rao Bevin? Yes. He was imprisoned for rape and castration, no. Do you know about safe reasoning? Any other reason to not argue? Yes. I saw a front pay and I said, yes, you were correct. I think you said that it's not I miss news. No, there is better reason to not argue. I think there's an influential, like, you used to say influencing the is influential. I'm the yes, you're pretty late.

Oh, so there is the main issue that I think about him is I saw a trailer of his movies. It's called Messenger of God. And he's also very famous to give statements such as I have taught without how to play cricket, PD sandho how to play rat intern, Shinaja Mogiji, how to do politics. He has taken, he said, I'm the guru of all the best in the team.

The questionnaire is not that important in that what he is. How does this start, while deras such as Sada becomes so popular in southern Punjab and northern Iran? How does this happen? And the question here is also asked: In certain parts of Punjab, there are Dalits.

And they are not allowed to enter the Guruaras in those places.

Now, if you think about Guru Ansahir as a book, it's an anti-caste doctrine. It takes progressive things to understand almost newest religion in the history of India. So it takes from Tamir, e.g., it will take from Raiders, it will take from sparks from the Quran, it takes parts from Hindu scriptures and creates modern genealogistic documents. But the important part is, in practice, caste continuity, and that is very interesting. That's only even in that religion. So it's also called a South Asian phenomenon in Broadway.

But you know also, like Pakistan, e.g. All the famous people you know of Pakistan, they would be either Ashraf or Ahmed. Ashrafs and Amras are dust. There might be other villages, also pressure. So this is, so you're a coach.

And now the Qureshis have asked in us that we need to move out. And interestingly, the narrator is, “Oh, we are getting these people out and we'll send them out to Dazil.” What they forget is that the CVD is actually a home of, or has given rise to, centuries of social networks and logics of production.

When I am there in that CVD, what has happened is an ancillary industry that has grown around that avatar. Who are the people who are in the world bringing the animal to the treatment, right? What is going to be the drainage level in the draining room? How are you going to cut the meat? How do you maintain sanitation, right? What happens to the entails of the meat that has to be thrown out? What happens to the waste? Everything is figured out in this case. And you have people moving in and out with social networks to make this work happen.

You want to actually shift it geographically. That means you need to create a new kind of a social network, a new kind of organization in the alien place like usual.

The next question is that it is also a time in the Indian context where the question of meat eating is right now, like, a lot of people are discussing what people should eat. And should people be taking, eating, seeing? And it's connected to, oh, if you have this, you cannot eat this. If you have this, then you cannot eat it. It has gone to that extent that I don't know whether you seen this video is very answered.

Opinion is that somebody came to West Bengal and told Bengalis, for voracious fishing features, that giving this Bukha Kura, don't do this. Otherwise they saw what this guy called Bhagavish for David's, uh, direct Dhirenda Shasti.

Yes, good, rather Dhirendi Shasti. So makes it new. So Virendrashasti comes and says that they're not supposed to eat it. If you don't eat it, you are not a Hindu, you are a fake Hindu.

Now, the interesting part about people worth these is that they considered Guruda as being a daughter of Padma who's coming from far-off land. And you can just imagine, if you think about the Virgin Padiya, she lives in the arid snow desert of Kailash, definitely having only flows, food there. Nothing below the gospel. Now she's come back to a very tropical place. So what do we feed her?

So we actually, in Bengal, give fish and meat to the goddess. But she's come back to her mother's place of thoughts as well. Suddenly you have this question about, I am this, I am a Hindu, if you are doing this.

Now, so in itself, the coordinate orders and the practice of religion varies depending on the mythologies of those rhythms. You create mix around. And it is across the globe, but in India it's much more.

In this situation, meat is a very important meat, and especially beef. So this avatar is actually for cutting cows or buffaloes. This is what becomes a code of contestation, whether this should be in the city, within the city, or not. Now, obviously, it gets pushed out to Dazao.

The problem with this whole thing is the Qureshis were not the only people working there. With the Qureshis were a service group, the Dalit community, who were taking care of the sanitation and taking the parts of the animal which is not sold easily, right? So they take the skin away, sell it to the leather market, they take their tails away, or they take the roughage away, whatever it is, they are taking that away from that place, and it's a monopoly profession of that task force.

Now, if you think about it, you're trying to attack on the question of meat that, please take it out of it, right? And you're fixing the idea to a certain religion. Okay, you will do it good somewhere else. But it became such a question because it's not working good. There are so many types of communities in England, particularly in this place, by this kind of good.

And the other is who is transporting the meat. Like, e.g., who is buying the meat is a question. This meat is being exported by a company owned by a general in Europe. By the fork of companies, have some deep giant person who.

The question is that, in this entire contradiction, right, you are doing a symbolic thing of pulling something out of where it was comfortable and putting it somewhere else. It affects every case professional. How work gets done, it raises costs.

Now, this is Sarah Hamilton's argument: that what you're doing is superficial, is ornamental, but what you're harming is much more deep. You are affecting a lot more than the people you just want to fit. It has cascading effects.

The second important question here is where it gets transferred to, or what happens here. It gets transferred to Dazim. Now, anybody know what Dazi, where Gazi could go? When you move from Dupree to Delhi, it lies in the centre, and there's a very huge garbage tump that classified among, you know. The huge small hill outside is Glazing Purpose, the landfill site, right? Solid-based landfill site. And it has never been taken care of for the last 50,000 years. I have not seen it get removed; it's still there.

Now, this landfill site was there just next to. You want to take it out of the place because of hygiene and sanitation failure, and you put a meat industry site just beside a landfill site, where you have no control about water quality, about air quality.

Second, people have to travel so many kilometres a little, because these people are living where I am, the city, to go to San Francisco. Now they travel so much to go to the other two world. Costs increase.

Second, the government of scientists can be interested. Because the government said we moved and made it mechanized. So what's the cost mechanization they do? Is that the ant will consider? They're not anybody's. Not going to halal, chattel, nothing was going to talk about that one. You noted anything going, you stun the animal. There is a process called stunning the animal and falls. Basically, I think there is some sound kind of boxes or something you use or a wavelet, and that animal falls. It's a complete mechanical process.

So what they did is to create a new form of assembly line. An assembly line is created in a job which was done by even labor only, and you bring in machines there. By doing that, what happens? The cost doubles for the people who are using this argument.

Second, what happens? People are not skilled enough to work with. Third, everybody cannot be included because so much of work is not required because there is recognization. So there is de-skilling. Earlier, somebody might know the entire process of cutting the meat. A person would just sit, and maybe a small part of the meat will come chocolate sentence. It changed how work gets done in Buddha, which speaks to cost of universal design and tech. There is reskilling, and there is unemployment at this point, and there is raise of cost rates, cost per cost.

The further point to be understood from here is then what do people do? Obviously, if I can't pay so much money to go to Dazzle because all the travelling costs are. You take an annual, you need a what is called as a Tata 404. It's a small car kind of institution. You need that one. It doesn't use the city. Sorry, in the center belly, you take it, comes to a certain point, you take the That you walk with you. You can't do that, I raise a lot of them. So gently, you have to take the car.

Then comes the problem: then of you have created this weighted web into make it very formal, make a wise, now you have informal people give rise to illegal spaces in which this work would happen to reduce cost. And people will do it because they don't have jobs in the single outcome.

And this will lead to what? Then for the it will be lead to Lynch because when it goes from the avatar, right, it's certified. This will aim package to me. But because of the cost that you raise today for cutting the meat, this informality would lead to a lot of suspicion in this kind of pattern, and thus leading a lot of friction between the meat also.

What was thought to be formalization at its height, regularization, city planning, leads to a ramification where things become much more reform. So this is what Zareen's argument is.

Do you have any questions? Sure. If you read this article, uh, this is in the C versus. Oh. Something would say something funny. You wouldn't have a you have it in the name of almet marginalized something. Uh, margin modification model. Yeah.

The second article is a parallel article. It talks about the idea of the realization of mind. Now the V steam plant plant itself has interesting. It's one of the first steam plants that gets built out here independently. It's still undertaken, and it employs a lot of people, government jobs across the hierarchy.

So the division of labour, all the labourers are the unreliable. And Parry, Jonathan Parry, uh, is in Delaware, in this case, something that's beautiful. And Delaware is again an industrial town. Anyone jumpshare code? I own Jumpshafe Purchase. No, no, India is nothing. I have anything from Jumpshares Program Industrial Township.

Will I go? Where is that? Stephen Island.

Okay. So what's the 2nd? Stephen Island. Stephen Island? Is it like a small place or else a huge spending? Asia and spending time. But after that island.

So do your parents work in that? These steel townships, right? They are very interesting because you have a steel factory, then you have residential. So the A-grade officers will stay on a certain side of the street, crawling one doors, and the person in the B-grade officer will stay somewhere else. Then you're looking in star A, B, C, D. So it's almost like a hostile situation for logic. You walk a few minutes and you reach the factory and you work there.

Tanny is not interested, and he's written a book on what has happened to work. Tanny is interested in the question of seaside. Tan is asking the question: why have the seaside rates increased in lifestyle? This is really a question. And he follows it through by interviewing people who have lost their family members to seaside, going through the police records which are recording suicides.

And he's also trying to check whether Durkheim's idea of suicide, which is that if there is, as I don't know, I will listen to Durkheim. Durkheim has there two things: social recognition and integration. And these are spectrums. If you have high implication to terminal side, if you have low implication, people in the outside. So they can categorize it into four times, those 2 s.

So Parry is saying thousands hold true when it comes to electronic. And what Parry finds is that people who are working in the Group C, Group B jobs, they are not committing suicide as much. Most people who commit suicide were a part of what is called the aristocracy of India.

Ancestral labour means labour which has privileges and a decent life and a daily faith wage. Every neighbour does that. So a manager of the family, somebody's father was a manager thing, his son comes. And he's asking why.

The reason that Tarry cites is the 1990s: we have liberalization in this country. What is FDC? I know that. What do they mean in the world?

So liberalization means giving industries more liberty to do things, reducing the kind of permissions that you would need to start an industry, reducing the essential any kind of blocket that the news is previously had to expand themselves to open new industries. They were reduced.

Privatization essentially meant privatizing more of the public industries which the government could not handle anymore or were facing losses, and the government is operating them. Globalization and opening India's gates for foreign investment and for foreign countries to come and invest.

So I think also India and global centre focus more on money and also how you manage higher scale than there should be more benefits than more redis than. So, in itself, it means that parts that are called the state-owned need to be let go, private capital needs to come there and make home.

Liberalization means the state is not going to control what somebody produces and what content you take a part. And globalization means please come here and try to invest money. Also open shopping. That's the LD.

Post-MDC module find that even sectors which were absolutely formal, like the steel, parts of that workforce get smacked. For example, let's say I require 100 people to carry weights. Why should I give a government a lot? If there is that work, there is a hundred. I will contact a labour contractor. He is going to bring these people, they will work for some time, pay them for an hour, they will leave.

The other important part of this is that there is an immense amount of mechanization, demechanization that starts happening. In the top ecological engineers, managers, right? Those shrink. Thus, new employment in that strata is shrinking.

This strata, which has the analysis. But I am wearing a black shirt, a T-shirt, but it's a white-collared shirt. The other is the blue-collared shirt. So people who generally labour, right, who have to really put in their arms, hands into what is another class of people. The black-collar works, it's called. Even below them, cleaning, sanitation work, and others would fall into that.

So every strata of this factory is getting hit by privatization. Of two kinds, one is. The other is getting parts of it and immediately getting contractual jobs. And they say that the people who are committing suicide come from intergenerationally the blue-collar or, sorry, white-collar of this family.

All the classes are losing jobs, but it's a topic. All people who work on any suicides in those families. Why do you think that's the question of families? Why do you think they are questioning suicide?

Reputation, loss of prestige, potential stuff, nature, social evolution, social evolution, and social evolution is. The idea here is of this concept called social mobility.

Going back to the question of stratification, it means if class strategy is malleable or perforated, the idea here is that you would be able to move after that, right? That was ideal. And some of them did. And in the pleas, they were performing jobs. They moved up.

Suddenly, this has been closed. People can't move up because there are less number of jobs. That is not a problem. You can't move up, but at least you want to stay in the same class. When the maintainer status quo, you can't even do that, because you don't earn as much as your father used to do on both sides.

Second, it's a question of reputation that's been lost. That's why it's called the downward social mobility that this class is facing. The blue world families, they're not facing it. What they're saying: I never anyways had the privileges of the management's family. I was always treated as a worker. What has changed in the status is I have become contractual. My place in this economy, in this organization, has created the same. Not the same for people whose families have been in the top five in the Astral Services. That's what this is.

Second reason is very interesting. See, there are a lot of people who say that a lot of young men committed suicide because they were not getting married. The idea in the steel town to lie was, if you want to get married, create a permanent job through the steel town. So there is this idea of no create, which means a job, and town, which means work. One is employment, one is near work. This is a category that people literally attach prestige to.

For example, if I go and tell my people in my neighbourhood, I'm like a very job. It's just taking too much time. I could see so many people. It's better I focus on my research, and my research implemented, yeah, right, because I don't need to.

I don't think money is unique. That's my second thing. The problem here is that will I be accepted the same work and accomplish the same things, do the same work? No, because that would be seen as a calm and not competent. The social prestige is linked to employment, not to the world, you can say.

That's why a lot of artists get asked this question. So let's hear us in India's question, not US company. So let's say you are at LCD, Carnot Place. How many beats do Carnot Place? How many beat in Delhi here? Same number of touchdowns.

So, let's say you are in Carnot Place and you are playing your guitar and you are playing, providing volleyball thing, right? And you're playing old times of old time soft like of Umar's son or uncle card. And then the uncle card stands. Fifty years. Very good red uncles, and they'll give you ₹500. It's also good. Someone is appreciative or whatever. And then they'll say that this is all okay, but come back. This is all okay, but what work for you?

So that thing that he's doing is not working. And even if they did work without an employment status, it's still not doing something substantial. That's a problem. And this is where the people are understanding that I might be working, but it doesn't have social prestige at that time.

At actually they are coming in suicide, they are not getting married, there is issues of very high rate levels, issues of alcoholism that is leading to this. So at the heart of suicide was not somebody's individual psyche, but a social change which was brought by liberalization, privatization, and cooperation. And we tend to bring it down to the individual, because something was wrong there.

The other important part of this article that he goes on to say is that when he checks the reports of the police on the seaside of the, it was all over the place. It was written that people were alcoholic, whereas those people were not available. They had dead FIRE.

So what he goes on to say is that the reasons of suicide, or what even suicide is, is constructed on the paper of that FIR. It has nothing to do with the act of the suicide. It is a myth that is being created post the passing away of Sam. Because people don't say it's exactly right. It's about shame that the police will get called down. What is happening, ABCD? Some myth will get created around this, he said. This might be the reason, and this generally the refusal.

In this situation, what Jonathan Tyne says is he's a Marxian himself. He says that the Crimean idea of regulation and integration is not what you do. This space has quite an adequate amount of indication. Ward is there, certain kinds of works are there, regulation is there, but what has happened here is the type of body. Expect that every social customer changed.

Thus, the economic base has changed. That's why suicide is happening, which is in the superstructure. The cognitive and the behavioral world is in the superstructure. From a Marxist point of view, when the economic basis change to this extent, you will have these kind of outfalls in the times. Yesterday night, somebody, rather a student, came in suicide. I don't know what he's saying to him.

The reason that was being put there is that he was cheating from his home and that he was taken to whatever officers they had examinations there. And right now, at Mongolia's own—no, we counseled and we said that nothing's gonna happen. In Spanish, they're saying, no, you say that you're gonna suspect suspension of 1 h of the instruction. And that's the important thing. This is the standard we now know.

Ideas work. I'm sure I don't know how it works here, but I'm sure here also it's a little bit simple. You might have a sensitive drop, you might have a great drop, that you might not be able to hold positions of responsibility: A, B, C, D.

Now, my question is: one is that, do we say that the boss was cheating? There is something ethically wrong about him, or there is something wrong in him itself. That's why it is cheap. It's the problem in the individual. It's a question to ask.

From a double-handed angle, no, it's not. I'm just not saying there's a problem. That means, say that it's too much of a regulation. You try to regulate that behavior so much that this person did this. And maybe there was a lack of behavior, who knows? But you try to regulate that person so much in those few hours that that person speaks. Dr. Michael Daken explained, and Dakhan does, Dakai Man ideation could say, oh well, institute, you are a governor. Why do you regulate so much? Should have understood that we don't tell you. Let somebody stay with him at this situation.

Now, from Marx's experience, from a point of view, this is very different. First thing, why does Sami cheat? Why does something cheap? Why does sound teach cheap? Give a simple example. Why does sound teaching? You feel it. That's the actual thing you can do that. No, this is all forgetting. No, you get better grades for in the remote part. That leads you for your luncheon, for your jobs.

Now, my question is: that somebody who is already in an adult space right now, what happens if that person gets a life point? There's this famous book, I'm sure you know—not yet, don't read it, not worth it—called 5.7. Because you came and we have read that, it's for you. But this 5.7 is a book which means you call it Tycon, isn't it for the book something? Let's see if you are a five-point summer.

The problem here is that you will say this is what you are worried about, this automatic. And even that, which kind of a problem, a sign placement might be, okay, put a work of sign. Meta placement would be better. Or a placement with a newly minted startup with a huge VC fund coming in from Life Operator would be much better. So this categor there's also categorization here, only more complete.

Now, does the person, or didn't the person 1st come to his side, think about all of these things in his individual? I don't think you did that. But that person understands. It means something not to be it. Something bad is going to happen 10%. That is where this comes from.

The 2nd point, very important, the contradiction, exactly like what Zari Daniels is saying. You bring a new technology just for elements. Chats will get into it. Everybody is chatting with you from morning mill. What every kind of question and remote is something so normalized on an every-minute basis, how are students expected to mitigate things in their brain or think on their own phone?

I am telling you, because I have been using it heavily for writing mails. I hate writing mails. Today, if you write more than you write a mail, it's going to take me much more time than I used to take just a few months ago. I've lost track of what I wrote, because I just made the point that I was. Because I was in a piece for you and said, yeah, I just don't know this work.

Now I realize that it is taking something out of me. Writing nails and writing tables can be rejected. Writing answers are rejected. You are muting certain skill sets already because people are using it, and then we're expecting that that person will think also and write an answer in which it is a contradiction at that point, to think about a thinking human who is very reliant and dependent on. And I'm not working at the level that you're creating, you're losing.

So Marx would say that there are changes in the economics realm which is coming up, these kind of models, because he explicitly said that the main crime that had committed was they had scanned this species paper and gave it to ChatGPT to give our system.

Not only we, every one of us, all of the, I know for a fact the readings that I give my course, they go to the LORS, for sure. People prepare for exams by sending the readings that we give. What are the key points? I'm sure people know. What are the questions that can be asked? It's a good way to even do that.

If that is the situation, why do not that possibly think the question level is there and let me scan it? According to Marx Wood Exchange, it is change in the way mode of production happens.

Skill acquisition happens that way that is led to suicide. So, that same suicide can be thought about in multiple ways, but in no way can implicate the responsibility of institutions and social structures.

The institution of Major Bombay, the institution of the family that's involved there, the institution vis-à-vis the technology brought, technology itself also is an institution, right? Or the social structure of merit, a class. I don't know how class function of this person also. All these are being unrolled. And even an abdicator is constituted from that and say, oh well, it's the actor. It is the actor, did it. But so surprising is going to say it's not just about the, it's more than a matter.

Okay, so these are the two readings that we're supposed to do. Do read it if you can, otherwise evidence unlikely as well as you can. Write in your own handwriting. Do you have any questions for yourself? It's a 15-month semester picture. A 40-month semester picture. Two essays will be there, a couple of essays will be there. Says will take for at least half an hour to read in Google, and then for the next 1 h you answer the question. That's it. Trendy marks each question to this.

You have any more questions? Take 5 min now. Ask questions. I will not be there for the day of the food, so any recommendations on communications and stuff like that? Or ideally, if you have, let's say, a let's say you have five months. Do you think about for every five months you at least put in 150 words? 150 to 150 words is put in for writing words. 150 to 100 is the base. After that, if you like to write a word.

So let's say. But I will put in water. Not water, it's a meaningful water. The question will seem to be open, but I have quite stringent ideas of how to do it.

Any more questions? Yes, would you like to go in a structure for writing? I don't think that I should include it. The structure is pretty simple. You write, I'll give you one advice for any course that I think how you should include. Write in an active voice and say I don't want to pass. If you want to quote something from a book, Parry says this, right? I argue, I think, right in that poster. Give your voice an importance, at least in my paper. It's important to do that.

If you know that, basically, what we're seeing is we're replicating things from you're not looking at the highest levels. So you see lots of words on the answers.

Okay, best of luck, and I'll see you next semester then. Oh, I'll see you in a few days for your bye luck, yes. But anyways, next semester to the somehow. Which words? Research control to the quality department. This is unlike you to the course, but what do you think about the whole situation that happened yesterday?
