Expected should have mentioned the assignment, or even so, we still have any guidance steps if you want to explain where you're missing that as well.

For question one, yes, compulsory. Others, you don't really need to do it. Simple.

Last class, we were talking about this possible word max level, and please, another one of those very famous sociologists. His idea is that the way we know Marx—sorry, Maxwell—is that he was always fighting the coast of Marx. Somebody put agree to Marks on post-milligan marks.

And it's interesting that, unlike a lot of paradigmatic subjects which run on a single paradigm, social science won't do that. For example, if you think about gravitation, the theory of gravitation in physics has its A days in the new mean movements, but it moves the moment it reaches the 20th century.

And it's interesting, though, today knowing what's your nuclear in the economy. Because it's obscure, because it's a building block, and you move far away. There's no way in which you would be able to view them to do your research.

But in sociology, it's interesting that we are reading about people who are from the 20th century, and still the way or the perspective that they pushed is still quite relevant in understanding how societal functions.

In Marxian terms, this is the case. It is the economy and changes in the economy which brings about the genesis, the transformation, and evolution of all these categories and many more. For him, this is the scaffolding on which all these superstars are.

There is a pre-document that gives to the ideas to the idea of the economy. When I say economy, it means how an economy is organized, how do people work, how do people work, earn, what is the mode of currency and transaction? All of this is a part of the economy.

According to Marx, that's the reason when that changes, or that requires a different form of superstructure, that arise.

Weber is saying at some level that this is untrue. Weber is saying that rather than tracing it in this way, we should look at things like this, perceived as a horizontal space. Thus, in a way, in sociology, in social science, religion can very well influence the economy, as much as the common career is available.

This is the difference between the Marxian sociology and the world's astrology. There are two books, two work of his that we will study, but this is the basic difference.

So one of the things that he says—for Durkheim, as we discussed, the study of sociology is the study of social factors. Social facts. An example of one sub-social fact is suicide, one of them. Another social fact is the idea of merit, the social fact.

For him, a social fact could be something like employment, could be looked at as a social class. And all the structures—gender, caste—are influencing that social class to a certain level. And they influence it through mechanisms of social inclination and social recognition. That's the idea.

So, for me, the unit of analysis is a social fact. For Weber, this doesn't hold true. Weber is saying—well, he's come to the scene a little bit later than Marx—and although he's saying that a society is much more dynamic than just the social facts.

So, again, social facts don't give the dynamism that societies require. Societies are this fast-paced movement. For example, Dimant is sending me a hundred. What time will it take? So, India, a few seconds. So, for him, this speech is a very good thing.

That the human society would reach cannot be understood through a social fact. Thus, he proposes the idea of social action. It is literally what it does to sociology: it brings a verb form to the studying of sociology.

It is as if sociology would be able to today study time at a changing job in changing geographies at different stages. That's why he's using words like social action.

So, first question is: What is action? What is action? Your thesis here. What is action? Either existing or not doing something. Doing something is action, again.

Let's start with this. Krish, what is an action you performed before you came to this class? You woke up in the morning and now you're in the class. What are the actions that you performed? Came up in the morning? Do I have writing? Okay. Peaches. After that? Similarity or different things? Similar. Then? Then? Went for class, went for lunch? Went for class? Went for lunch?

Are these mobiles missing in the actual? They might come, but maybe they walk with friends, or maybe they walk. That sort of action. So the travelling is—what will they do? Other actions? Interacting with friends.

Interacting with friends? Yes. The thought. But okay, let's—that's a different thing. Our thoughts are our thoughts, actions or not? But we are talking about direct actions that we do, where effort is required. Anything that requires effort is an act. So, in texting, summary is an action. It requires effort.

And the other interesting thing is the difference that you're making. Is there any action without thinking? What is an action without thinking? Inflicts action in the sense that it does something also without thinking. So, repetitively. When you do an action repetitively, maybe you don't think about it. You get used to it. But generally, whenever you're doing a lot of actions, it requires active thinking at the same time.

And some of the, e.g., a cricket player who plays an ideal, I'm sure he doesn't think before hitting a straight drive or a lockdown. It's a reflex. Any sport, you have to think all the time. Whether it is football, cricket, any or not. Expert chess game. I don't think chess is played defensively.

Now, the question that comes here is, all of a sudden, all of these actions require effort. Now, think about brushing your teeth as an activity. Okay. It's a reflex action. You don't think too much, right? Well, okay. How many of you count while you're brushing your teeth? They keep brushing for two minutes. Is there anybody who counts? I know people count. People have to count. They say you should count while brushing.

The question I have is, if that is reflex, if that is so normal and normal in all of our lives, what do artists show while selling this? What do artists show? A bright smile. Laudio. A bright smile. A good smile. An attractive person with a bright smile. An attractive person with a bright smile.

Now describe an ad. Describe a cringe toothpaste ad. Closeup or Colgate MaxFresh. The one where the interviewer sort of breaks into the room and asks if you have clout or something like that. Can you say, “I don't know about all this. Why are you making whatever else?” What are the other ways in which it is coming?

There is one where there's like a point over and then it's a there we go, and then it goes into taxes. Exactly. Ten years back, there was a—or ten, yeah, ten, fifteen years back. I'm sure it's still there. There's a perfume brand, a deodorant brand, called Axe, AX. Does anybody know what Axe used to look like? I wish it would be like. Yes, suddenly in the middle of the street, somebody would put an Axe, and then there's a possibility that that person, that man, would be lynched by women. Possible thousands of women running after him.

So something that is too normal gets presented like that. What happens in these ads is that they convert something that's an action into a social action. A social action is something which is to do, but first which has a definite audience on the other side, and there is an intentionality towards that action. It needs to have an intention, and it needs to have the other involved. Only then is it a social action.

For example, think about health and high school. Or rather, broadly, health. And people who exercise. Now, there are two ways to think about exercising. One is a lot of people will say it's about me, it's about my right. That's true. It is not a social action. But there will be people who say, “I am doing this because I want to look like something in front of others.” It becomes a social action.

A social action always has an audience and a purpose. And this is what Weber is interested in. And he's saying, society is a constellation of social actions being performed by social actors that are social.

Interestingly, when we speak about the intentionality behind these social actions, he uses a word for rationality. This rationality, again, is not a common-sense way of understanding rationality. What is the definition of rationality? Accounts should be. What is rationality? What does it mean to be a rational person?

You should make decisions without being influenced by emotions and through a logical manner. So, logical manner, unbiased manner, that's rationality. Someone who doesn't solely believe in an idealistic idealism is rational, who takes indeed. Pragmatics is part of rationality.

Okay. Now let's say using proper human research and how to reflect the environmental changes and the—basically, it is what you are saying. Something what they said is big, but you said something very interesting is human reason without any bias or other inferences: rationality. And whatever is saying, it is not rationality, but rationalities.

Again, if you think about it, when I started off this course, sociology is about problematizing what is common-sensical. Common-sense understanding is exactly what it is. How do you break this? The first job that they're interested in.

So, before we go on to rationalities, first of all, according to him, social action is a part of, encompasses all forms of action of human behavior. It involves assigning a subjective meaning to behavior. When we say subjective meaning, it means that, let's say, there's an act of gain. This person—so let's say if I ask somebody in this class, I'm not going to do that—if you're in a relationship, why do you like the other person? Or one person, sure.

But this question is: I couldn't be asked any of you why do you like or love the other person, or, let's say, the word love with a capital act. Let's say, what would be the reason that you would love this person? I thought it would if you start looking for refund and you drop become love. But let's not consider this a sort of structure. Let's start there. But let's say that you would absolutely—what is the language allowed other than the same?

What would you say? It would sound more cheaper, right? If I say that I want to have babies with you, it sounds very cheap, right? Or just say that I want to take care of your health, hygiene, food, loading up. You don't think that. It would look like I want. I'm just talking about what do generally people say as the reasons why they love the other person in a white producer.

You might want to say to everybody, "Look, you want to see movies." What is Jash? What are you doing? Yes, they say. No, no, these people are—if these people are a couple attending in this road, they won't handle and walk every day. No, they don't say that they're in a relationship. It's unknown. Why does this person say this? Why does this person not know the person? What is the reason? Because it has to be unique; otherwise, it can also be a friendship.

Interestingly, whatever that person says, that person will try to make it personal. That person ideally will try to say things that are not gendered in nature. For example, "You have long hair." It's a very gendered statement to be made. A lot of women have long hair. The worst thing to be said is, "You have good traits." I think that's a genuine statement, and I don't know how it lands up in religion.

So people generally use things that are very personal. If you read poetry, if you read scholarly novelists who write good novels, they would write things like—and I know it might sound pretty true—but they would write that, "You know what? You have a mark on your face," and so on. Why is that being said? What they're saying is attaching some subjectivity to their feelings. If you say only body-type stuff, it takes you out; it takes the subjectivity out of it. You don't say whatever. It is something that I personally do. That is what subjectivity is all about.

Now, this subjectivity, according to Weber, is something that is required for sociologists to study: the subjective meaning.

Okay, then go ahead. Who agrees with Weber?

So, when you say that if you give a very specific statement, that removes a different key output over—I'm not sure if the statement's falling back—but if you say that, "Oh, I like this person because they keep me as their parent, and I keep them as their parent," is that a very generic statement?

No, it's not exactly. So it doesn't have to be. But what you said is a very interesting statement that everybody can see and say, and still it's a first-person statement. But now, if your friend asks, "What do you mean by paradigm?" what we are always trying to avoid in a situation where it is a demanded relationship, we are trying to remove, ideally, the idea of a calculative reason.

So when you use a priority, it makes complete sense. But if you go on with this question, let's say a husband says, "I love my wife because I am her parent and she is my parent." And now we look at how is fighting displayed, right? So the husband might say, "Oh, well, I always get ironed clothes in the morning. I get warm meals on all those three days." And we ask the woman, "How is he showing you his product?" She might go on to say something like, "Oh, well, he takes care of A, B, C, T, E, or also he gives me a lot of things," right? When he created down, at one part, on one side there is care; on the other side, it's consumption. That's how the first statement really works. You have a bad dialogue.

According to you, as a normal person—huh? Do you say that you love some person?

It's for the personal action in the case.

Yeah, what according to you is a normal person? It is not possible. No, it's not. It's not something that I am putting—so I'm not putting myself into a position in which I'll say, "Okay, well, this reason is a good reason, this reason is a bad reason." It's not about that. It's about how people justify their action.

Gender. What according to you is not a personal thing?

To say that I fell in love with you because of many reasons. One was that we belong to the same region and we have the same cluster. Here it's called the cluster. Here it's for anyone of the cluster that is working on. So, it brings the second stage. From A, you have multiple games. It's a social group.

The question is: what is known as a personal subjective expression? Is it their own or not? Or we'll find all of these A's in this menu behaving and putting such reasons. Both are possible.

We go on to that philosophical question: whether we have a will or an agency or not, or whether it is shaped by some other things.

And Weber has some answers for how this happened. And he also has an answer for why this person might give an absolutely different answer than the social group they are being socialized people.

Also, slightly different from the conversation we're going to have, but you mentioned what separates an action, like a social action, from a non-action. It's making an impact on the society around you. Exercising for yourself is not much of an action. Exercising to look good to a legal issue.

But don't you think a lot of actions that people think are not social actions might be social actions? The other thing is that it doesn't need to be towards a society. It can be towards one person; it can be towards specific people.

Also, you building a certain kind of a CV when you say, "It's my CV." The question is: if it's your CV, it's so individual, why does everybody's CV look at the same proper idea? Most CVs in triple ID Hydra will look very similar if they're applying for similar jobs. They'll show the same expertise, similar projects, similar courses here, right? That's why Rossus forced us to think people today, because I know they have to write the course there in the CV.

In itself, something that is so individual, right? CVs should be so individual. It should really bring out you in that CV. The paper is saying, "This person is like that; this person is this." It all very much looks similar because your audience is the same. That's all. That's why building a CV is a social action. It has a purpose, intentionality, as well as motives.

How do we connect it into fit to be at all the social activity? There's always two things that have to be kept in mind. Social action could be done at an individual level; social action could be done at a group level.

Let's go back to the example of X. So when we think about the question, do you know what mob lynching is? The thing about mob lynching is a social action or an action, social or reaction. Why? Are you talking about acts one way and a mob? An expert on that's happening in the country now on quite a recurrent basis. Yesterday itself, something was finished. So is this social action or an action?

Social action.

Why? What is the intention?

And regardless of the intention, it has consequences on multiple people.

I mean, it does have an intention, but even if the intention is to affect multiple people, it is, at the end of the day, a social action.

If you think about a dam, a dam which holds water that's opened to save the dam, you know, right? So it fills up, the dam will break, so they open the water gates or something. The question is then, is it a social action or not a social action?

It's a social action.

Technology comes into work because of social media. Technology always has an intentionality and an audience. There's no technology if it doesn't have an intention. All it does is an intention but doesn't have an audience. Then why is that? It has to be used.

Coming back to the question of lynching, what is the intention behind lynching? Behind that lynching, what is the intention and purpose behind a mob lynching? Think about any of the examples. Do you want to say something? Just say.

One, the reason could be to vent out the outrage we have on someone being something which is not acceptable by society.

To vent out anger, yeah.

Okay. I would say that it's a very—for example, in the US they would lynch that for nearly looking at a white woman and how many of them.

Yes, we are setting a party like you cannot do this. If you do this, there are consequences to a single person, and they can get away with what they did. That is the way you see it.

So masking the fact that they are doing something without facing as dire as a concept. Anything else? Is anything like a person or in the remote? Literally, that's the action.

So basically, if five people start fighting here, right, that would also have those questions, right? But here the question is that the intention is the social process of otherizing people. You want a touch. The intention is these people are different, and then the question whether they should exist or not.

How about, say, Harry Potter?

No, no, Chris, you don't know what I want. I'm not here.

Oh, you've not seen it. Have you seen Star Wars?

No?

No.

So in Harry Potter, this entire group from the wizarding community that gets created of the market—the same things are the Muggles. The non-wizardry folks are the Muggles, right? Non-magical folks. And there's another category of what is called half-bloods, a mix between the wizarding community and the non-magical folks. And who are the people who really hate these two kinds?

The hypocrites.

The theocrats who believe that they are theoprats and who are the supporters of the bill. More than ox border means for the terrender. Dead leaders, right. So, dead leaders are the villains gang. They don't like this mixed flux and the hard bones, right? And they think that it's going to be the Be a pure white. This exact thing is a euphemism, a metaphor for any kind of ethnic nationalism. That's what high quarter is about. It's about how an ethnic pride can be so high that you can will not correct anybody. And ethnic rights that only work if there is a person otherwise doesn't mean that ethnicities shouldn't be there. What shouldn't we link to their language, to their food, their socialization, all the things that are there? Because they link towards that.

But the thing is, in a certain kind of society, in Galilean society, progressive society, it said Onama is going to be celebrated two years after. You have seen those ads in the mails. Some students have said that we are going to have Onama. The idea here is, Olam might not be my festival, but I can go there. I can actually show my Hindu, which is a certain thing, a Veshi, it's a bodhi kind of thing, right? I can wear that as a Bengali and go and have a sadhya. Is sadha my favestable before? Absolutely, but I will still go and have the food.

This question of clinching is a social action because the heart of it, the intention is of otherization. A sociologist has to abstract it from the reasons that people put to really what's happening. And who is it directed towards? You can really understand.

If you think about the audience, who is the audience here? In a case of momentum, who is the audience? The FCC in voice. Huh? The FPC gave the voice in voltage. And there are more audiences. People who are to either the links coming or the convenient of the people who link are also getting a message that like have to make who does the it is towards the citizen that gets a gift that says, we the people of India. That's the very broad which this is being targeted towards, has not been this.

When we said, we the people of India, I was not wrong, but I mean the citizens of this country said in 47, we the people of India, the first thing it does is say, it's not King Victoria gave it to us. Maharaj Arji gave it to us, no. We gave this constitution to us. Right? And here we is a poor word. It is about everybody. It automatically harms any intention of otherization. That is the audience.

But yeah, specifically we can come it down to obviously both the communities that would be involved, one by dying and one by killing, are also audiences. It is very much a social action. That's the point. Even though at the heart of it, it might be that the person who got lynched had some personal enmity to all of those deaths. That might be the reason. But when it's a public spectacle, it is a social action.

Let's take another example. And these examples are very important because when you read something as the news from what's happened to this country, we have a very interesting take on things, from a scale.

How many of you remember Nirga the Teli great case that happened? Twenty twelve, if I'm not wrong. Twelve, 13-ish. Were you born? You had to go. Which year were you born? Seven. Seven. Two thousand seven? What do you—it's just maybe five years old, six years old? This happens to be. Or seven years ago, twelve or 14, I think, something because I was in Iran. I don't remember it, but I tend to know about two or three years or so, like in 2013.

Yes. So you would remember. So you remember hearing it from others, or how do other people do it? Uh, who is this? You will read some articles about it. Huh? Is this audio about it? That didn't have judgment, I didn't have any. Okay.

But the interesting part is, uh, what Renda became a very interest, a very I don't know whether it's so interesting, but a certain moment. It's a very interesting thing. Indian democracy. Rapes in India or violence against women in India is as common as one in three min. That's the number. NCR number.

The question is, what is this India? What happened? Even when you think about gang rapes, they are also quite common. The question is, when you think about the rape law of India, if you are convicted under committing rape, you are committing a crime against the state, not towards the particular government. So the punishment that you are supposed to get is that you have committed an act against the state. That's what the law is. You got convicted of it. Why did the law do this? Why did the law suddenly make this difference that when it comes to this thing, it's not about the person and what happened to the person, but it's beyond that. It's towards the society. When I say still, it's towards the society. Why has that been done?

Because over centuries, whenever there have been conflicts, whether that be wars, women have been on the other side of this atrocity, vis-à-vis being sexually abused.

Why is the question? It lies on the discussion that we started off. Akamsha, you said something, right? She said something that the common-sensical idea is that the family and the children are everything for that world, ultimately, as well as some of it. There's something else added to that, which is honour. Honour of the family, honour of the community, honour of the citizen rests with the women of the family.

Again, that's why when you think about fashion abuse broadly, it is very much a social action. And Abha Neva became such a spectacle because what people understood is that it's not just about that body that got passed away. It's a broader symptom of what—not symptom also—it is about indicating the women that stay in home. And that's what you can do.

Think about two years back. You heard about the archival case? It is underlayer of understanding that women are not seen in the place for work. It's where she was on duty. The intention here is how the state understands it: staying at home. We're crossing a boundary.

So, webinar in social action really can help us to understand at least these things. Now, you can all just come and tell me, people who do it, do they think like this? It doesn't always matter, because the meanings that a social group can belong to, they don't always tell us things in completely plain language. It's coded.

There's an interesting language that has been said in Bengal today. So, Bengal, if you think about Bengal, there is one thing that when I was born, you know, that father was born from that. Even though we faced the partition very badly, an interesting thing happened in Bengal. It is that the two communities in this part of the country didn't have much issues.

If you think about the 1990s, Babri was killed. There were events all over the country; there wasn't a single event in total. Because the communities understood that to live with each other, there was some kind of cultural harmony. The same industry now is a new rhetoric that's out there. There is so much of communal harmony, and people quite like it.

I'm not saying that people don't fight with each other over each other; they do. You don't find much instances as often. The reason that came up, and now people are saying, is that because, you know what? Hindus, because there's no Muslims. Which means what they're saying is, at the heart of the Hindus, the other religious sections that exist in Bengal, they don't know it, but they're not Hindus.

So, because it's a spiritual thing inside all of us, that's why we don't fight with each other. Now, when we hear such kind of thing, right, it is a narrative; it's a rhetoric. We don't know how this is going to affect people when they come into action.

A sociologist is always trying to abstract this type of an idea, an ideology that's pushing people. That's the webinar that we're going to design. So, let's go into rationality, and we'll come back to rationality.

There are four kinds of social actions according to a 1st. I'm not going to pronounce the German word: instrumental rational action.

What's an instrumental rational action? Let's say I wish that Yash—sorry, completely, what was his name? Sean. So, let's say Yash has scored 83 in my paper, minor Isha's. And Yash sees that there is Yash, there is Ijas, there is Vanshi, there is Siddhan. All of them is what it is, and he suddenly realizes that these professors are not going to give 4As in this course. They will never give 4As. They have a historical record of giving only 1A in a class of 20. He has done this analysis. What should he do? What will you do?

So that they are getting—they gave him half a dozen things. I will try to how that marks. Oh, you beg, borrow ideas and beg for the marks. But that's so kind and generous of him to do that.

An instrumental rational person goes to something else. What? Find mistakes in the car. Find mistakes in the air and to see. Yes! The other thing, there's something else that gives Rashford. He can preempt this before the NSEM and make sure he distracts the rest three pretty well the night before the exam so that they get less marks. It was a part of that. Then you distract all of the people so that you get more names.

It's an instrumental way of thinking. It means you do not think about the method or what you need to do; you just think about the goal. To achieve that goal, he will do anything under the rug, over the rug, under the table, over the table.

The other way, what he can do is, if he can, silently bump off these three people. How can he kill these three? There is only 183 in this class. He is going to be the only 83.

He will not do that because he knows that the law might catch him, and also he is not the person. That's also the other thing. The question is: this is instrumentality. When the method—it doesn't matter. You'll do whatever it takes.

Now think about Jihadi Pradesh. Now there's a huge movement that's going on. There are eight data centers that are to come just on the eastern hearts of our ocean. Virgin forests, much older than human beings. They want to flatten that and have data centers there. For doing that, what's happening? They have burned over a hundred villages because they were not leaving those homes, so they burned those villages. It is all Adivasi villages. That they were, and they are thrown out. With the help of police, the police unit, it's not any, it was authority.

The question is: if you think about it, what justification can you give for this? What's the goal? I'd say that. What's the purpose of the goal? Bring the goal. Huh? Building the material. Why? AI. What? AI is the word. Artificial intelligence.

So what is it with Andhra that is doing this? Penny for the nation. Penfitship for? Penny for nation. They will rent up out of companies. They are rent up. They are rendered executed out of the companies. Yeah, oh, yes. I mean Andhra Pradesh's next view is to have a Hyderabad-ish growth. So it's to get into that sector of things. They get the money enough by doing this. So that's the biggest incentive. Development. This is the goal. And what we call this is adverse development. This is adversarial for some people.

Going back to the question that many said, somebody said that it's the next Hyderabad-ish. Yeah, it is very much an opportunity to tell you to build that computer system. But interestingly, the method that's been used, I would say it's very much used to me. Have you heard this term? This is something, a phrase we hear talk about very often when I used to work in conservation and environmental science. Is that if you want to develop, there would be minor things happening here and there. So you can't think about those small birds and their nests, because development has to happen.

The question about that human beings—an interesting human being—we are saying human beings have a certain privilege. Have the right to design what a developed nation will look like. And it is exactly, somebody said, it's hyper-developed. This is what the vision is. Urban law. Or ruler. Bombing. Certain parts of bombing, not a car bombing. Certain parts of Bombay.

So these actions, they are instrumental, are they rational? When we love villages, these actions are instrumental, are they rational? That's what Weber is saying. He has taken that rational word out of our common sense, and he is saying these are all the rights of rationalities that exist.

For example, if you are having a debate with somebody who supports more data centers in India, great. Once you will go on questioning those people about why you're doing A, B, C, D, what's—why are you having a data center in southern Maharashtra, where people commit suicide because their farmlands don't have water? Marathon, look into that region. Most number of pharmacy sites are at that area. It's a completely drought-prone area.

First of all, you said that you have a cash crop like sugarcane there, which takes so much water. It needs so much water. That is not their crop. It's the wrong crop. Us to do that. Now your ugly will set us there. What about the water table? Right? How do you think there will be so many tables? What's the reason that people will give the people who will order such destination if they will?

The given reason is that it will help more people than it has, and the active reason is it will help more important people than it has. I am not going to go into the second part of the issue. I think there is a lot of rhetoric that goes on. But what he said is going to benefit most people than it hurts.

A few days back, a building got burned in India. I forgot the next case. And around 100 people burnt alive in one of the major cities. I'm sure it could be Hyderabad or Bombay and to this area, the south part of, because it was a technical. It happened. You know why? Why is the fire escape? Was it a signal? No, not the achievement. Here, a lot of people died. Not much people died. But these are multiple.

There was Delhi B coaching centre burning last year. Uh, something caught fire, people got—people died in the basements. The reason of this fire, they couldn't control the fire because the fire extinguishers were not working. They were old, 20 years old. So they don't change the fire estimation.

A country that is dealing with expiry dates of fire estimation still aims, thinking that AI data centers are at the next-generation level. There is a difference in the reality and what is gained there. And this can only be done through instrumental data.

Just think for one thing about computing education in India. What were you taught the first thing?

Did everybody have computers as part of their computer education in school? Everybody had that? What did you start off with?

Okay, now let's come to the software part. What were Microsoft family? Renta Microsoft Family comes from there. Then when you went into coding, around C—C, I don't know how you could do C++ today. We used to do C plus 10. 2J was the software that we used to pull down, but I'm sure it has developed a lot. Maybe Python is now in plus 10, I'm pretty sure. All those things have happened.

What is happening? Why are we not using FOSS products for our schools? Free and open software products for our schools? Why are we using Microsoft? People could be much more creative with FOSS on a Linux system right now. Why is Windows all over the place? System?

No, it's not about that. It's not about commonality, and it's not about ease of use only. But small systems are also quite easy to use. The basic things, the minuscule have been called. You had four software? But there was a repository. Most small small have Windows, I'm pretty sure. That's the even Government supports when you think about KDs. Let's talk about any KD here. Nobody? All the KDs actually are—are you from K? The KDs, Shenman, the companies, all of them are Microsoft.

You have created a dependence, and you have locked in that dependence so that people are not creative enough to build their own stuff from their channel. FOSS architecture can help people to be very creative themselves. You could actually, really, today's step, at least interact with communities which can help you develop service products for yourself.

This dependence doesn't allow people to do. If you're very much locked in, I'm talking about the layman. I'm not talking about the III D students. I'm talking about a school KV, let's say, placed in Chajma in Kanpur, basically.

Yes, you have a question? Krish had a question. Okay. We'll talk about what incentives do the schools have to take raise? What incentives do people have? What incentives do the schools have to take invasive? Like you mentioned that you could so people can't get a computer. Why are you doing this all? From, at least, from Microsoft, why are they using Microsoft remote? Are you saying that because it was given for free?

Oh, imagine. But for free. That's the entire idea of branding. You brand Windows as the thing, right? No, that's what I'm saying. It's popular because it was made popular at a certain time. It didn't—it's birth—it became popular the moment it was born. It was made popular by giving it for multiple years. And now they're reaping the benefits of the different things.

The reason they do this, and the same reason that they allow privacy on a smaller scale, is that when people are young, they're developing their talents. They're going to—we targeted it, like, at a remote shop. And they're going to allow them to use it for free, but when they join the industry, then the company they work under will have to use the same software because they're dependent on it now. And then those companies have to buy licenses. They can buy it.

Okay. So there are very dependency on mobilities, or—yeah. Like, I was thinking about that. Like, when we were talking about administrative, like, is it almost all infrastructural development, like adversarial small scales? Like, what is this more at this case?

It is whenever you are tilling the ground as an agricultural—it kills a lot of microbes that are completely killed. So if I think about species equity, even that should be done, tilling the ground. But if you have to till the ground to put source seeds in it, the question here is not who is only the beneficiary of that development. The question is who is participating in designing that development. That is the question.

The homes of the people you raised, the place where this data center is going to stand, did you consume it there? Did you bring people from their communities historically into ideations about development at the state level?

So it is adversarial in the sense that it first says, “You get out of here. You have nothing to do with this environment.” And this is in an Adivasi hamlet. I am not sure how much of it. The data set they use, they have. If you give them a lot of tokens, I don't know how they're going to use it. I have no idea what is their computer usage. Because since it's an Adivasi hamlet in a forest, I don't think they are at much of a clawed fable by one. I'm just guessing here.

So what I'm saying is there's an instrumentality already building even the operations of the stage and of his samples. But it can also hold up on India fields.

The second is what is known as fensional action, value-rational action.

Now, value-rational action means, let's say that one of the actual actions is the actual action Monday morning. You are walking to the animal block, the academy block, and you suddenly see our director, Sandhi, shouting at a student, right?

Or, well, imagine Ishore rather than somebody, because I showed you Ishore multiple times. Let's say Ishod is shouting at a student and then goes inside his office, prints a cane. On inside of which was used in my school, in Baltimore school, and it starts scanning Siddhanta. Siddhant goes into the question: How many of you will go and stop the show? Why will you do this? Because he is your friend? Or will you do it for anybody?

It's not actual. I will do it for anybody. Is it similar answers? Or is there anybody who is saying, “I will do it only for Siddhan is going to be kid”? You do it if Siddhan is getting kid, right? Otherwise, you will not want to get it. Yeah, a lot of people might not do it.

And the reason is what? Why are people not stopping this? So it's not them, really. No, it's not only about them; it's about who's sitting. Exactly. I mean, there's more problem that they will also get caned or something. So why would he want to stop that person?

So he said that it's not ethical, so I'll stop if it's anybody. I'll be there. He said, “No, you can't do this,” right? So where does this come from? And you see, it comes from a certain set of values. These values can be very much possible. These values can be very much from a group.

For example, Titanium in the movie, the captain says that, “I'm not going to go. I'm going to drown the mission.” It's a question of honour there, right? Or an army officer in the field, even though they know that he has been given this posting, there is an army from the other side that will capture this. The person of belief will actually decide it might be a good thing that I die here to fight these people rather than remote. So it's a question of all of them.

The interesting thing is, when we think about value rationality, where do values come from? Where do values come from? So, okay, so I'm sure we all believe that values didn't exist in the air, like oxygen, before human beings were here. It came with the formation of society.

Suddenly, how did human beings come up with these ideas of values? It's quite abstract because she was drowned over, right? But still, people have brought in this idea of pride. All our wisdom, ethics. Values come from mistakes. So, unless there's a drowning ship, there's no intenser.

So, with the committing of mistakes, they just realize following the system is to minimize these errors, and it sort of then becomes. Drowning was a mistake; it would run away, I think.

No, no, you're asking its origin, right? So, if the ship drowns and the captain returns back, let's say, and faces the brunt of it, then there comes up a system where they say, “Okay, if it goes down, I'll just go down with it rather than bring in order in a human society you are a part of.”

So society first has to fall into that pit of mistakes and then come back. Just think this is the psychological idea of archetypes. The famous 12 archetypes of human society, but values basically come from the idea of mostly in society.

And that's a very interesting quotation from Radha Yah said. Values really in human society start to be spoken about a lot more with the idea of a belief system. And it's a religion. I say belief system. There's a difference.

Belief systems try to say or define what is to be a cumulative. A value doesn't exist if there is no concept of sin. Why do you need a value? If only once you invented the idea of good and evil, sin and bias, those kind of things, you require a value system so that people fall in the bias category, in the good category. Value protects you from basically going down into the realm of hell.

Now, the interesting question is: Indian belief systems are multiple. With orthodox systems, they are the heterodox systems. What are the heterodox systems? For example, Niyan, Mimansa, Chava, Buddhism, Jainism are all heterodox systems.

Heterodox and orthodox here means—oh, there is this entire—if you can. There's also atheism that's there. Nastikta is another way in which people think.

Now, when you think about these sects, what is it that they're saying? Are they saying they don't believe in anything? They're saying they don't believe in what? Vedas and the Hindu streets. That's why they're heterodox. Otherwise, it would fall in here with that.

Doesn't mean that they don't have their books; they have their books. But all of these things come out of a certain kind of a religious majority, where you said that, no, there's a caste system there that devolved.

This is the first story. Then there's obviously religions from which developed outside. India is coming. This is also, e.g., Islam came from outside.

Christianity came from outside. And this is all a belief system that they create. The interesting question is: if it is a belief system, does an agnostic person, an atheist person, have values? If they have values, where are they going to?

Again, I want to stick to my original thesis of making a mistake. So, I mean, I have seen the history of mistakes, whether you are Gnostic or religious, whether you are Christian or non-Hindu or Muslim, whatever. They have certain overlapping sins and goods that we can see in most of these systems, which come from somebody observing a mistake and then, you know, trying to rectify it and prevent it from happening with this system, whether it's in any particular...

So basically, we are saying that values are restrictive to avoid mistakes.

Yeah. I disagree with the thesis as a word that Middle Genesis was raised. I reasonably believe it. I said belief systems are the source of values. I think religion is the source of values. Beliefs are the source of values. I disagree with that.

Why? Examples? Because let's take an example of Japan. More of Japan. More than 50% of people in Japan are atheists. And Japan has one of the things that I'm not sure. Where is analysis coming from? Their history, their culture, their— that's the way their society works, from the mistakes?

If I was a gay, I saw someone share, like, I saw the person be shared or person C, and he's appreciated for that value, and I don't think I should follow that. So it is an environment nurturing what you will value. It is through a certain kind of socialization from childhood that people can have a value system of their own without necessarily falling into a category of belief systems.

That proposition, I mean, because whenever you'll generally walk the streets of the world, a thing that will come and hit you is religious people are most likely ethical people. Some people could almost say religious people are ethical people.

Now I want to say, what is religion? First question: what should we generally organize? Religion that they will talk about. It's not going to be Scientological. Scientological is a religion that a lot of people follow in US. It's not going to be Scientological. But they will say that there's also Satanism, by the way, as a religious discussion practice. So they will say the major religions, they have given me a value system, I adhered to that, tell me that. Starts making me a thing.

The question here that Ravandanath asks is pretty interesting. In a book called Gaura, if you ever have time, a lot of time to read, there's a novel called Gaura. You should read Gaura. Gaura asks this. A guy says to his potential girlfriend that, you know what, I need to be much more ethical than you in everything I do because you have a God to whom you can go and say sorry for your deeds. I don't have God.

The other way to say this is that an atheist person is always going to be judged more than a religious person because the religious person at least has a place where you can go and say that I have sinned, or you can ask for repentance in Hinduism. I'm sure major religions exist as well. Where will an atheist person go? And I completely agree with you that when you think about belief systems, or sorry, these values that he's talking about, a lot of it has come through socialization, through the idea of values. Through what was appreciated in one generation, it got passed on as stories. That is a set of values, but also a lot of values come from realism, and they might be overlapping also. It doesn't need to be exclusive.

Questions of valour, pride, and truth are also there in religion, but also there with a person who doesn't believe in realism or in a religious system. It's completely out of that fluid. What Web is saying, there are a lot of social actions that people do from this value. They do it out of the way.

For example, let's say that there is pollution in campus. It has happened in many campuses now in the last two or three years. Let's say that there's a police in this campus. And there is a particular student, and that student has— let's make a recent controversy. Somebody was reading I Am Malala and the police came, the police are goons came and beat them up. Is there any Malayalam or other book that they are getting? Oh, that Anne Frank. I don't know why Umu hated me so much; they gifted me this book when I was twelve years old. Why would he give that book for a twelve-year-old? So anyways.

So these were— now let's say that some people bought such books in this campus, and obviously they have been banned in Malala anymore in this country, or this Anne Frank bought Tolstoy's War just because it has warrant and already supported. They will pick up a certain kind of police. The question then is: when the administration tries to talk to the police, what kind of a rationality do they use?

But thinking more about it, let's say that decision says it's a police case. Let the police do its job. What can we do about it? It's about one or two faculties to work. And I'm sure there'll be faculty and students. Let them go. Who don't want to read those books? There's a high chance that they hate that guy or girl also.

But it is, from a value system, this can't happen. Can't stop all people from reading books which they have kept in their personal space also, right? This junk that some people do is coming from a space of time.

But isn't this case a little mismatch of correlation and causation? Because I think regardless of the books that those people were holding, if somebody just informed them and said, okay, they are fine holding some books that should not be read, they would beat them off regardless.

No, I'm not talking about them beating them up. That's a very weird thing that happened. I'm saying that the police has some state, has something to be wrong, right? It has much more order to it. It has an FIR link to it also, right?

So forget about what is happening there. I am asking why do people go and say that no one can't beat this person. That's the only question I have to see. Why do some people, when I am writing a piece of paper, it is not going to be five to ten people who do. In this house, including students and men.

Because obviously, the other thing that he said, a lot of people will not stop the caning because it's deemed. A lot of people will not do that because it's police. If it's cooling, maybe a lot of people. So they have, first instance, not that unrealistic, but it's happened.

I think last year in Japan they banned a few books called—and recently we had that Makirala Badia Line case. People came out in support of him even though personally hated the guy out.

Yeah, absolutely. Exactly. And a lot of people said that when this one said something, a stupid joke, he said he is a stupid person. So when he said a stupid joke, a lot of people came saying, I don't want to defend this. I hate this guy, but just that he should have freedom of speech so that we have freedom of speech.

So we can find that one day you will be in yourself in that other thing and then you'll like the other people. That's like, okay, we can go back to we don't agree with ourselves.

Yeah. So that's not saying when you don't agree with, when you don't like that person, still if you do things like this, it's somewhat on case of value.

The other way values come from, that's the modern definition of values, is from they say being political or political individual. That is the other case, and that's why Weber is so interested. As I started off, for Marx, it was all about the economy. However, it's not just the economy. He's saying there are multiple ways, multiple variables that are influencing our behaviors, our status, and the way we live.

There are two more categories here in these. The first is affective action. Over here, it is when we do something out of a company as an emotional reaction. It's a social action.

For example, let's think about sati, and it's very complicated. Why I start with sati is all of these actions we are talking about, when somebody is doing something or to discover in social action, it can have multiple rationalities working at the same time.

Satisfying. How do you see Padmaavat works? People watch Padmaavat movies and discuss. How about, do you remember the last scene? Going down the well? It was a beautiful scene. It was all CGI, but it was still beautiful, right?

See now, the question is, what are the rationalities that we are working there? First, the women will be obviously taken into capture by the attackers and they'll lose all their freedom, their dignity. They might even be raped and killed. So it's better to—and also honour. So it has definitely value rationality attached to it, right?

But it is also a state of affect, that they are immensely emotionally charged at this point because they're seeing their partners, their sons, their husbands being slaughtered in slaughter. It is even that.

So when we're saying that when people come with some actions out of affect, out of being emotional, right, it is so emotional. A part from which can direct our social actions also.

Very interesting things done by political groups. Political groups a lot of time ask instrumental rationality with this kind of affected rationality.

For example, let's say Lynchinger, exactly what it meant. How do you save these lives? How do you save these lives?

Well, two years back, there was a guy of your age, 22. He was driving his, again, a very elite person. He was driving a Pajero with two of his friends, right? And it was racing through Purna. There was a group of people who drove past that guy, stopped that Pajero, or shot him dead, thinking that he was basically taking a carton of beef behind his family. They had information.

The driver, the person who was driving, is of the same company. He is an upper-caste person. What do you do? And interestingly, when that culprit who shot came up, he was going to court and was asked, “Why did we do this? He’s from Arnold. Why did we kill this guy?” Right? This guy was saying, “You know what? I had to do this. I heard this news that they had plucked beef at some place, and they take me. I got so emotionally charged. I did it. I won’t say sorry to his fathers. I don’t want to say sorry to his fathers. I don’t want a judicial trial. I want his father to kill me and shoot me.” And this guy’s—how do you? It’s just crime, right? It’s an interesting way in which something that was very much, I would say, driven by an instrumental rationality got converted into athletic. There is no value in killing other people, by the way. So that doesn’t feature in your Weberian ideal. It is not a value.

And then comes the last point, which is traditional action. Traditional action means rationalities that come from traditional activities, traditional social institutions such as family, race, caste, even religion.

Now, the question is: I said value and belief systems are very much connected. The difference is, values can be observed, understood, and used even if you are not a part of the community. For example, if you go to Varanasi, there’s someone in Varanasi—surely everyone is—so there was something else also. If you go to Varanasi, you find a lot of white Jewish men, white Catholic men and women on the caste of Varanasi, wearing these shawls, the pagwa or white-colour shawls, and they are moving around. That this is heaven here. So they’ll move here, they’ll get trained in Hindu scriptures, ATCT, or music, whatever is happening.

The question here is that this person, if this person has taken up Hinduism, right, this person was not born into Hinduism, his family is not Hindu, they take it up because they are just taking the values of it and they are reading and learning those values literally. So values you can read and learn. In traditional rationality, you won’t include it. From our childhood, we are being socialized into it. A lot of people are socialized into thinking that shaadi or marriage needs to be done within the caste. I have not read it anywhere, even today. And when I say I have not read it anywhere, I am excluding poor and red. I’ve been to this. I haven’t attended that you can’t marry outside the class. But it’s there, and I know about it from my childhood. How do I know about it? It’s a family. It’s religious. Even without seeing, they made me realize, you know, this is what you shouldn’t create.

The other thing, interestingly, let’s say the idea that there are two kinds of children born in this world. Yes. Huh? Rich and poor? Well, there are people in the middle, like us also. But other than that, two kinds of people are born. And this category only can have two. There can’t be any other things, right? Two kinds of children born in the world, yes. Strong-willed children, yeah. Strong will. Will is born after you are born in socialization; you get a will, the ability to give birth, and, like, I want to say male and female, but with the confusion now, it’s a spectrum. You can’t put it there. No parents are more parents. Fortunate and unfortunate. Tribal and non-tribal, that can be the other category. Legitimate and illegitimate.

Just think about the screwed-up nature of this logic. Born from gender number one, when that person is born out of nine months, I believe you are A, B, C, that person comes to the world and you are saying, “This is illegitimate.” This thing is a thing legitimately, as in somehow. This thing shouldn’t be here. It is an alien thing. It is not legitimate. It should be thrown out, as if it’s—I don’t know—let’s say it’s basically a hara in that sense. It shouldn’t exist. Is existence a problem?

Which is the undeleted? Born out of the red dog. Born out of a red dog? We are born in the Arabian. Born in a marriage? Not born in a marriage. People who are born outside marriage or outside, they are intellectual. Did anybody tell me this from childhood? Has anyone told me this every day? No, they are not correct. Right? Because there is nothing called the illegible child. Every child is legible. The child is here, this child is here, so this person has a right to exist in this world.

This is coming from this idea of federal legislation. I’m coming from a socialization that starts from childhood onwards. And also, I’m not saying it’s unique to India; it’s unique to the world in many ways. Because if you don’t have a question of a legitimate child, the first thing you could finish is private property. Very problematic. You will have successors. Just think about that simple problem. It’s very important in critical times to have a concept of legitimate child and illegitimate child. Lord obviously was not only monogamous, right?

So all the children born outside the marriage, other women, don't become a part of the property share. It's only the children within that marriage with his wife that can actually—heir—they're the heir to the property. This is something that's traditional.

So value rationality can be gained from reading books also, from not being socialized in a particular culture also. Traditional rationality cannot, you know. It requires a certain kind of—what are the norms, rules, taboos, needs—is from the child who does that. Only then you do things out of pressure.

Do you have any questions? What is any thinking about rationality? It's thinking about two things. One is intention, the other is who's a directive also. Both of the things are very important, yeah.

I understand what—sorry—about the production and the argument. Because I think, take the Guru example. Can't you tell that the shorter person? He has his value in the world, and you need to keep his value.

So AC data, there was modern data that's basically from the information. So affect in itself is a state, right, where somebody does something. First of all, it has to be a state of rage, happiness, sadness. It is at that state where it will be very difficult for us to actually come up or think about any other forms of values to exist in the world.

There's a movie called NH10. This had the—I'm sorry, I forgot—Anushka Sharma, this lead of the movie, NH10. And over there, the movie is about a road rage that happens. And then it goes on to find a very patient.

At the end of it, we see a woman standing and saying, “How dare you kill my child, sons?” His sons tried to rape and kill Anushka Sharma, kill her husband also. So when Anushka Sharma killed all of these people, his mother—these villains—are coming and saying, “How dare you do that?” Right.

Now when Anushka was basically fighting back, it's very difficult to understand the value system there. Because she has a woman who's revelling when actions are happening against us. It's almost like instinctively you are doing A, B, C, D.

Values, she was again a child, again a woman who we saw that scaring towards her husband very much. The reproductive sphere, everything. But at that point, she became in a space that she was operating was: “I will react.”

I think effective actions, when you think about that, it's a space of reaction also. Whereas, in value rationality, it can have much more space and time to think. But again, I'm telling you, all of these rationalities, what I was saying, we'll talk about this in the next class, are ideal types. You generally have mixtures of them operating on the—can this voltage—but the value is.
