So, as far as I'm concerned, some people call me. So we have Berger. There's one of those people who has been talking about how do you popularize sociology. You know? Berger, can you hear him? No? No.

So knowing is the consequence of thinking. No. If that were so, you see, don't you think knowing is the consequence of thinking? If that were the case, we would have been in the ideal world. Knowledge here is received without any thoughts going into it. If your case was the case, then we wouldn't have had a notion of misinformation or disinformation. It's knowledge without heads and tails or any scaffolding of thinking. It just comes and hits you, and you really like it.

So how do you systematically collect knowledge and then think about that knowledge? Because from knowledge, the other part that's important and is not spoken about in this campus of the world, why is the idea of wisdom? If you mix knowledge with a certain kind of perspective of thinking, you transform it into the idea of wisdom. The idea of the wise is just not a collector of knowledge, but someone who knows, "What can I think I can do? What is the possibility?"

So yesterday in my class, this was not an introduction to sociology, I did the same thing repeatedly. How do you fix it? So we agree that there is no issue with it. We know for a fact that there is a lot of issue taking place in the education system. It's not perfect, so just tell me, what are the problems?

And someone in that class said that the problem for the Indian education system is that there is reservation. We can get done with reservation right now; it happens all the time. Now, he or she has come to that conclusion, not because they don't have information or knowledge. You have some viewpoints to discover, right? But can he explain to me what the prospect of that is? Can he explain, or can she explain to me, how her privileged or disadvantaged position affects this way of thinking? It is to be cognizant of the prospect of that that I take on multiple subjects. Only then, if I'm cognizant of that, if I'm reflexive of that, then I'm super sociable. Otherwise, you don't have an opinion, which would be basically categorized as knowledge-oriented. Information is about you.

Now, what Berger has done with the idea of sociology, saying that a sociologist itself, the first thing that they do is they are inherently skeptical. So skepticism is at the heart of being a sociologist. You don't take things for granted. And how do you become questioning?

The second idea here is that you need to be valuable. I'll give you an example. When I was doing my PhD in Ireland, there was a stabbing incident. It happens in Ireland. So there was this guy who was the best he was going to choose. And there was a guy who tried to enter; he had liquor on him, and there was a scuffle there, and some other seniors jammed literally ten-point sides. Happened after that, what has happened? We understood there was another scuffle in the hostel after that, that people literally jammed each other with knives, because there were literally gangs of men also coming in.

Now, my question to you: what gave rise to this? First thing, yes, non-CSI people, let's ask them. Now, this is like a stabbing incident. Young men tried to argue. What kind of influence did they argue? Maybe it was influenced by the presence of passion. By the presence? They had liquor on them. They were under the influence? Yeah, they were under the influence of alcohol.

What do you think? Why did this happen? What might be the reason for this happening? I don't know if my experience and the world of the universe is about influence by the presence of substance abuse. But also, people have the opportunity to do something which is not original.

Okay, so first of all, you're saying that there might have been substances, or it might have been some judgment that somebody had over somebody else. That's why this took place. Any other reasons you can think of?

So after the pen incident, those people might have realized that, okay, we can actually do this, and then... This is allowed. This is allowed, and that's when...

So the first statement that you're saying, it is independent of what has happened. That was generally a rage or anger, which was realized. So it's a normal thing that... Exactly. You know, there's an example similar that happened at one point, not that, and the other thing would be, it's like the normalization of, "We have to fight to get our issues resolved."

Yeah, redemption is the way to go. Now, this is fine. It could be in the sense of nationalism. So you said that there are people trying to occupy, so you occupy something you value with things that are inappropriate to the situation, you know, like stuff like that. So you're trying to protect yourself, and does that mean—what justification do you think is using violence? It's a predictive mechanism about something that you think is very valuable.

The incident took place, and it's basically because, again, I have this weird habit of poking my nose in the nasty area. I found out that the person who was stabbed because comes from Bihar. The person that later on, when they went there, there were these two seniors who were stabbed, seniors in class. This is fourth year and third year. The fourth years were stabbed; they were from Haryana.

Now, that doesn't say anything until you know for a fact that the college has been segregating students in Boston based on their region for the last 15 years. So Bihari people from Bihar, when they came, they went to hall two. People from Haryana went to hall three. This is a rivalry that's as old as 15 years. It was much more subdued, nothing like this. We didn't know about it, maybe. There were scuffles, there was abuse, there was noise, there were tests and competitions. This is a pattern. This is the climax of that in-depth analysis.

Now, from there, whatever you said, because we didn't know about it, that is us without skepticism. You didn't question your judgment. The moment you ask more questions about the judgment, you get released from the problem. So sociology is inherently skeptical. There is this question of value-free or value-neutral; we will talk about it. It is different from sciences.

In science and technology—now I'm speaking from technology; I'm not from a science field—from a science field, the bacteria or virus under observation in the microscope has nothing to do with my view. That exists in a separate reality, its own life, so I can literally be very objective about this. Think about a physics experiment. You're trying to understand tension in strings. It doesn't have anything to do with you and your being right? So there is apparently an inherent objectivity in science. And science says nothing but be real objective.

Thus, you can generalize if you keep the conditions the same, whether it be Switzerland or whether it be India. If you have the same temperature, pressure, and the same conditions, I should have the same results. Generalizability is gone and it's separated.

Now, how do I resolve that? As a sociologist, how can you be value-free when you are also a humanist? Humans are value-free. Next is understanding that, when we think about it, there are multiple perspectives, or it's called a multi-paradigm of substance. That means there can be multiple justifications if you follow different modes of thinking. If you're a Marxist, you would land up in a certain conclusion than if you are over-valued. But the government doesn't see that. But the way we understand this is different.

This leads to at least acknowledging, I have not valued this as such, but I have a perspective through which I see this, and this is my value. It is acknowledgement of the values that we have that makes it value-free.

I was telling you this in my class. When I was working with households whose male breadwinner used to drive for Ola and Uber, or this delivery person, I was thinking about how to do it. I went to the flat; I lived there with them. The first thing I realized is, whenever I'm trying to speak to the women in the household, I'm never alone with them. There's always children, mother-in-law, or some other man is always there. It's not happening when I'm interviewing the male breadwinner. Why is this happening?

It happened because they're protective of the women. They don't want the woman to be in a solitary space. Even if it's a public space, let's say it's on the road—most people talk on the roads—she is surrounded by the family. They don't want her to be alone with a researcher.

What do I write now? I can only speak to women in group discussions. I couldn't take individual interviews. This is coming because I'm a male. I have to acknowledge this. Do I need to acknowledge that I'm doing the microbiome study, that I'm a man or a woman? I don't need to do that.

Interestingly, there is a slight lie to that, that I don't need to think if I'm doing the microbiome study or, let's say, technology. In the US, the first facial recognition system that was developed—there's a documentary. What happened is that they were explaining their models to a wider, to sell it to customers. And they said that we are going to work on multiple cases, and we'll show you how it does facial recognition.

Someone put their hands up. This woman is also a computer science person working in Microsoft. She says, I want you to work on a different data set that I will provide. Now, as you can imagine, there are billions of photographs that have gone into this facial recognition system. She just gave them people who are dark-skinned colors and brown-skinned. It started recognizing them; the model has objects and not humans.

What has happened then? What has happened is your entire training data is white males and females only. That's the start. Now, there are multiple ways this bias can actually go out. Let's take the example of Aadhaar. Do all of you know Aadhaar?

What's the USP, or the selling point of Aadhaar? Why is it so popular? I know it's forced on us, but still, it's popular because they are trying to sell it to us. So it can work. What's the USP of Aadhaar? Maybe immediate government services. That's why. So basically, if I put on biometric prints, you can't enter without biometric. I'm enforcing it on you. That doesn't say it's a need. It's enforcement.

Yeah, but it's not needed.

I agree, it's not needed. There's some USP to that. What is the use of Aadhaar? Is that universal ID? One person. It's recognized everywhere?

That's just saying that people will use rupees and not dollars in India. That's post-government. It's universal identification that is accepted everywhere. It's because... Why is it broad in its sense? What does identification help me as a government? What is the point?

So, it's a vertical identification medium through which the government can connect other things related to you, say, a bank account, the land you own, bank card, driver's license—everything is connected to that central identification. Basically, it is a unique identification of an individual. That gives only that person access to the services that government wants to provide. Your bank, your mobile phone, the Jand and Aadhaar mobile connections, the JAM pipeline—exactly wanted it to be a digital system without leakages. If I am putting my biometric sail, if I am doing an online payment, it's just me. Nobody else can access that.

There's an issue. Whoever works on a day-to-day basis as a manual worker—people in the country, in this country—my people can see their job every day is to break stones in Rajasthan. Huge land for stone. Oh, it's in Hyderabad also. If you go to those IKEA, before you see those entire mountains of... Yeah, these are private spaces from which people take stones to put in buildings and other usage. Then people move manually. If you keep on doing such a work, fleshing is the problem, farming, right? Your biometric goes off. You don't have... This entire finger becomes flared as a flag. So it becomes just a skin, no markings. What happens then? You can't access them. You can't access your ration card. You cannot prove that you are a manual worker.

So what did this do? This virus.

They haven't done virus yet.

No, they have done virus. So now we don't know what's the issue with the virus that's going on.

The second definition of the same class is to be objective. When you say it's objective, how do you protect it from any form of leakage, the data loss? In 2024 in Telangana, the entire Aadhaar database was leaked, and it lies with private players right now. So when something got interested, something's very interesting, which I will tell you, he says that I know from that the people who are working in today, all their biometrics are compromised. I'm not... I haven't been able to protect them. I'm able to...

So he said, value their business. Now, thus, as a sociologist, it's important to look behind the scenes and think of it. So don't get lost in the process.

So the other thing is, what can a sociologist study? One great example, I'll pass on by a reading book, which is something called Alaghi Linguage, a telegraphist. His father was a linguist. When he went to Chicago, and Chicago is a place where there were all the weird researchers, prisoners, alcoholics, right? Every kind of strange people who we think are weird, are criminals. Chicago is a place where they live, as a sociologist.

Now, Alaghi Linguage was an expert. He said, "I want to study the gangs of Chicago. I want to see this move of gangs or not. You should. You have to see gangs or not." So gangs of Chicago was happening. It is a Buddhist Buddhist Buddhist Buddhist identity. Have you all heard that identity?

It's not working?

It's not working. Maybe that is manually.

So what Alaghi Linguage does, he wants to study the gangs of Chicago. Now what is he studying? His single question is, how did these intergenerational gangs come into existence in Chicago? It's literally generation over generation. If you have read Mario Guzzo, he talks about this godfather, right? The godfather is literally generation over generation.

So what does Linguage do? How do you study them? Surveys won't work. Nobody is doing surveys with their guns on their bed. What Linguage does is go and become a gang member of Chicago. The book is called Gang Leader for a Day.

And he realizes that Chicago gangs, which are mostly, so you started African Americans, originally people, are gangs that all of them behave. The gangs came into existence to resist oppression of the police and of Italians and the Irish whites. That's the origin of the story.

And he found out that these gangs are not only just for their drugs, they're looking, taking care of their community, protecting their community, and most of all, they are humans who are friends, who are lovers, and who have relations with families who they care for.

You can never do that if you have already passed the judgment of somebody being unofficial and unrespectable. You can't do this anymore. The moment you have judged it as being delinquents, right? Or deviants or criminals, you'll never understand this.

For example, you have heard of Janapara? How many of you know the case of Janapara in Charminar? You know? Okay, let me ask. I don't know. You know why Janapara is famous for? No. Rich? Maybe it's famous for scams or other things. Yes, Janapara is famous for scams. It's a rural village kind of a setup, and it's famous for digital financial frauds. So there's probably people answering, you get an SMS, you get into that OTP, and they just scam you. It's a famous place.

There's a large article, which I'm supposed to send to people. I didn't do that. State Park, the name of the author, was really in home on this. She says, who are these people? And she finds that these are all Dalit men. Who are Dalits? It's my next question. Imanshika, right? Who are Dalits? That's a category that they're in. Who are Dalits in India?

People who have been systematically oppressed throughout generations, as in their lower-caste people who have been constantly put aside and isolated from the community. Any other modern language that is used for Dalits? I don't know. I think that's more metaphorical by language. There's a constitutional term. Scheduled Caste.

Now, what becomes interesting in Janapara, it is young men of this, what you were saying, who are generations of people taking this on. Why? They have the option of being migrant laborers in Delhi, Bombay. Their earlier generation was such, or they were farm laborers. It's not the only option. You think cybercrime is? I don't know. Maybe they think so. Why? They've done so because they understand that village, Janapara itself, the Muniyars and the Ramans, again, castes, are very powerful. They have a lot of resources. Their children have gone to Delhi University. They have mansions in those villages. They see cyber financial fraud as a means to get money so that they can build houses as big as that of the upper castes. They see that as an upper social mobility for their caste themselves.

Now, this itself, if you think about that, possible at some point of time, a lot of sociologists wanted to meddle in the question of caste. They said that it's too difficult, it's too complicated. The second is, how do you study cybercrimes? They're criminals, right? Why do you study them? And this Garjan Bhora didn't respond. It is really not about individuals who have some criminal bent of mind.

There's another study. I don't know if I should say it or not, but from a very cognitive science, psychology point of view. The study, the results were, went to, let's say, Indranagar, gave auto drivers 500 rupees. This is not happening in Bangalore, it's happening somewhere else. 500 rupees. Let's say it's Kenneth Steeple. Why would you want to? I want to see your browsing history. The guy said, why would I share what we do? He said, do you want the money? They did it with about 1,000 people. Basically, what they're doing is they're downloading the entire history and keeping it as a positive data.

The results that they came out to be is auto drivers, let's say, auto drivers watch a lot of porn, 5-6 hours. What's the problem with this study? They are also interested in something that's unrespectable, that's unofficial, but what's the problem with this study? One is that the next is about this. Auto drivers might not be technologically interested. I don't know about the internet. Yes, that's the other issue. You have not really told them what you use it for.

The next is the problem. They are not interested. There's a presumption to the entire data collection. What is that? That they don't know about the world. But I'm saying that the bias is that they will not know how to deal with it. They may not have demographic diversity in the data set. They might not have demographic diversity because they might all belong to a similar class position. People with fewer resources may spend more money than others. People with less resources may spend more money.

The main problem here is the power hierarchy. As a researcher, let's say from MIT, going and saying, you know, if you give me your data, I'll give you five hundred rupees. It is a transaction. This is unethical. Sociologists cannot pay anybody anymore. You can't. For any interviews.

Another question. Last time we were doing some work around how you people, the scapegoats, split by the rap. We're doing this work with Bhushan. Bhushan said that we have to do something that these people will otherwise not do. I said, no, I'll depend on the last time. The maximum we can do, we can treat them to a pizza. That's it. They did that. But also, these kids are very nice. Actually, so-called homosexuals across India. A lot of us did it. But when we did it the second time, we found out.

That's the idea of the fact that we are not offering money. The moment we offer money, people from a certain class background will be more with the argument. It's a positive data, and it's nonsense. Why offer that? And porn history?

Don't people with privileged positions watch porn? In Lok Sabha, the Indian Parliament, there have been videos in which MPs were watching porn while the session was on, on the budget. It's recorded history, right? So why did you actually choose auto-rickshaws? Because you thought people from that class are more likely to be delinquents, deviants, and criminals. It's a judgment that you ought to pass. And now, being from a different class and caste background, you'll try to mix them. To what? Awareness. These are the questions that, as a journalist, we need to be very careful while actually arguing on these topics. This is my position. I've not done this because this has consequences. So you really train your cognitive mind.

The other prof says that matters that others regard as too sacred or as too distasteful for investigation is basically the order of sociology.

The other important part, fact of the matter is, you people have got on this campus, or you're just first years when you've come to the program. Even very early, don't you? So when you came to the campus, do you remember there was a mail that was sent by one of your seniors? It was a female student, to all of us, about a sexual harassment order. And that says she had been harassed for almost years by somebody who was following her, stalking her. You should remember this mail that came a long time. So this is what we are talking about. I'll get to the proper bit.

And now, as a sociologist, I was called to a room with all men in front of me. So they had a session with the women and the men. I was not. I don't know why. But I was brought in there. And now what has happened during this entire boom, and I'm the point of the boundary. I'm sitting in this room and I see very empowered men, like all of us here. They were all empowered. They were saying that this is wrong, what this institution does. This is wrong, what this institution does. The institution should have better provisions to avoid this. How much time does it take for a sexual harassment case or any kind of harassment to be tackled by themselves? It's literally months. And it's sad that it's months because you fixed it.

As a sociologist, I'm looking at this and I'm like, okay, you're holding the people in power accountable for their work. That's great. We are the people in power.

I was having a question, and this was organized in such a way. How many of you believe that you like Hyderabad is an island? Is an island? There's water all around and we're all on an island. It has been like that. Why? I mean, a lot of the stuff that I was finding in my day-to-day life was easier. They were using it for three hours more. Maybe there's certain purchases and stuff like that. Even at a lot of places, I keep the face to an app. So I'm thinking of various places. I'm thinking of a simple app where someone comes into the campus. All of my cultural activities are on campus. So it's like I'm just in a particular place. I'm just poured out of the pot. It's saying that I am so linked to the place that it almost feels my world is this.

So is sexual harassment a problem of only this island, or do you have Hyderabad brought up entirely? It's a problem? It's an issue that all of the countries are dealing with?

First of all, you have to agree to the fact that as an island, you will not be able to fix a problem if there are structural resolutions being passed in the outer world. Why is that? Tomorrow, a new set of students will come and a new set of faculties will come. So what you do is, that's why the awareness comes. You keep on raising awareness.

The second problem is, when you question power, and because it's all men, I ask, did you question the boys' groups and draw it based on those groups? What does it mean? Did I speak about meeting up with a girl in a group? I was in Delhi to talk about this. As we put on a lot of the work, so then landing in Delhi, and the first thing I realized is, slangs are not used at an opportunity moment. Slangs are used in every sentence. I don't need to be enraged to do a couple of them. I can use it. Just on the phone. That's where the full stop punctuation marks how things are done.

I'm in the football pitch. I'm putting too much order to the most of the football players. Every kick that they say had a gender connotation. It was just ABC and PC throughout the football pitch. I'm a consequence of that. If somebody has literally missed the open goal option, if the goal goes here, the ball goes here, it doesn't hit the ball, it doesn't spin around. Maybe that person deserves a slight of slang on this opportunity. But this, everything slangs out there. I question this. I didn't realize it at that time.

My question is, did I say you cannot use this in football? I didn't do that. The first article or solution—not even solution—awareness, progressiveness, is when, in a boys' group, you say, “This is not normal. Nice. You're not saying the real purpose.” Or, “I don't know about this competition.” Then you talk about women in this group. Or you talk about even other challenges in this group. Have you done that?

And not to my surprise, because everybody in the room raised this question. But you know what? The issue is there. The bodies are there. Yeah, that's fine. But let's say, in fact, that person was stalking. I'm sure that person was also hosting that stalking in front of some friends. I know that fact because I've seen that happen. The Microsoft. There were friends in the room.

And the hard part of trying to say here is how you debunk generalizations. And at what scale? I could literally go down the scale of individuals or groups. I could keep it at the level of the Juba idea, the structures around it. I could take it up to Hyderabad, the city. And what's happening? Have you seen Hyderabad? Three years back, there's a whole incident of gang rape in Kuala Lumpur. There's a whole incident of gang rape. So there were MPs, there were people on the streets. You know what the police did? The police got three people, killed them in one hour in an encounter.

What's the problem with this? What's the issue? What does encounter mean? What happens if you kill people without trial? Do you understand the question? You got three people, as in, they thought that they were the people, the perpetrators, and killed those three people in one hour in an encounter. What's the issue?

They're not convicted, so it's not fair that they did it.

Exactly so. And their death was a cash payment.

Exactly, so it's called instant justice or mob violence. And another way to think about the scale of the problem is, we have Indian police, like Singapore and others, who strictly portrayed themselves as this bad baddie cop out there who's not getting justice. The system is not working that way. Instant justice doesn't work.

But how is this even instant justice? I mean, the real perpetrators could have gotten away, but it's not justice. It's a bizarre thing. It's absolutely—this guy is better than a function of a man who gets a shot. So it's also that it's also alien, so people get praise.

There are other ideas to relativize. What is relativization? These are to consider the question of gender, power dynamics in gender, across campuses in Hyderabad. Good lighting, bits, right? HCU, for example, that included relativizing the country. When you compare similar questions, you ask in different contexts. Why is the HCU context different from the lighting?

The scale of campus.

The scale of campus and?

And model.

Well, we are in a big group, but there are literally a big group of people. What's the big group that they are the people?

I've seen two things that stand out from our campus. That is, men and women walk into each other's campus without any reservations. So that's a very big distinction. And one more is that there's graffiti everywhere, there are posters everywhere, with no sort of consequences as far as minding.

So do you remember a mail that came? I'm not complaining about your incident. There's a mail that came last time. Whoever has...

This guidance. This was in that near the tea shop there. Whoever has painted that graphic should come out in the open and next story and do some social work. There's a mayor at the community.

Now, my question is, what's the problem with the graphic? I don't know. Please paint it all blue, red, whatever you want. The second thing is, what is the sense that there's something good in people to come out? Maybe people are into it. First of all, paint it. Maybe people do it. I don't know, there's a second order of people. Please paint it.

The question is, I don't know about graffiti. My purpose was to find out. But I don't know about the graffiti painting being common in certain areas, certain themes, and certain times of the year. It's not random graffiti.

No, the main other thing is that campus has an active political identity. There are multiple groups of people across left to right who practice politics. Not everybody practices politics. Thus, comparing what does Bharatiya Janata do would be of immense consequence between this campus and others.

Secondly, there are continuous talks being held, public lectures being held on the question of class, gender, class, poverty, farm issues, technology. It also doesn't stop. What we can actually find out is, are people immensely aware of everything and progressive? Or does it take these kinds of activities to actually make people aware of everything? We don't have to.

These kinds of talks happen. None of you will turn up for those talks for sure, but still. But the matter of fact is, it's not a common thing.

Now, it makes us see everything in a new light. The other thing is, it's not important for the scholar to watch the scene because everybody is in the same thing about the scene, but how you see it and you know how to see it.

How many of you have heard about this, the next step? How many of you have heard about this woman who killed her husband and put him in a drum three days back in the middle? Have you heard about these stories? Or did you read in some men are to manage?

There is an interview in which, I don't know whether it was possible, but Richard Chatterjee—have you heard about this actress called Richard Chatterjee? Have you seen this movie called Fukre? How many of you have seen Gangster possible?

Which one? Gangster possible. Okay, Gangster possible. Basically, one of the first movies is why it was Richard Chatterjee, so she's a very good actress.

Richard Chatterjee is sitting here. There's an actress sitting here. The actress is asking about gender questions, women, and suddenly there is somebody in the audience who is a woman, because she. And she asks an important question. She said that they are saying that there should be equity and equality and all this thing, but my son has said, "I'm not going to get married, mother."

Mother asks, "Why will you not get married? How? Why?" Well, we pass on to the next generation if you don't know any of the children. And the kind divers, dying from killing groups, so I'm afraid I will get killed. So I'll not get killed.

She's asking Richard Chatterjee whether it is you feminists, you empowered brats, that have brought this consequence on our son. How many women could have thought before this incident, "I'm not sure if I'm going to get married because my husband could turn out to be an asshole and do those things"? How many? Every woman.

Killers are mentioned. As far as I can tell us, the rate of domestic violence and convictions are all-time low while this thing is going on. There are no convictions.

But what happens is that if you don't have that perspective, that possible one principle that these issues are very complicated, some things have to be handled case by case, and some things are very structural. As a sociologist, we can't deal with the case by case as a subject. We think about the structural question.

Yes, sir.

You talked about what is intellectually eliminating bias, reducing bias, etc. Some bias will inherently have, like you accept it or deny it. Let's say they won't have justification.

So, basically, for me, the bias of not being able—it's not the bias, but the limitation that I do is that I would end up interviewing women from the household. It's just because of my being a male. I have to accept that I have to also make sure and accommodate that there are more women resources than me and do this work.

So, for example, my partner's work is absolutely on women, on person clusters. In very small, every single cluster is in the rural and western world. Would they interview? No. They will not interview.

The other work that Neha is doing to me is about micro-influencers. And what does it feel like being micro-influencers when your aspiration is the Kusha Kapila out there? What kind of labor goes in? What kind of harassment do you face on a daily basis, right?

You see the DMs, obviously. I have not seen it, but they showed it. Would I get that access? No. I will never get that access.

You know what's interesting? One of the things that we found out, and we have not written about it, is women get therapy in the world of social media influencers, whether small or large. Where do they get therapy from?

Yes. So let's say that a woman has received an obnoxious photograph in her email and she's traumatized. The first thought is coming to her, it's a kind of old woman, right? Where does she seek therapy? Next.

In a more or less big direction, which could enter them, I feel like that would be impossible. Do you seek therapy from institutions? Family? Absolutely not.

Once you seek therapy with your family, you're never going to be—you’re not going to be living in that sector anymore, because you can't ever talk to most people. It's inaccessible. Is it chargeable? But they seek therapy from?

Now, this information, as a man, I would never do. It's the gender that's working. It's working because, in our world, we live in an unequal world, and that's a beautiful fact. We were resource unequal. That's what this is the consequence of.

It's very important to see these slides, but I don't know what I will do because it's not easy to do. I'll just go on.

So, at the heart of the question that I ask now is: What is the story?

Now, the next two things are questions.

First, it is the society of societies. What is a society? Not your art of business. Not your art of culture. What is a society?

There's something about Indian society, but there's also something about Telugu society?

When we say societies, we sometimes bound them for our research vis-à-vis language, sometimes vis-à-vis aspirations, sometimes vis-à-vis geography. When people go out to the questions of what, for example, this information and this information, how is the Indian society getting affected? This is a large-scale survey that needs to be done across multiple cities and rural areas of India to answer this question. That's Indian society. I'm binding it.

If I say what's happening in major metropolises, because metro cities, even though they're discrete, disparate geographical entities, they have similar characteristics. Traffic is managed well, that's the law, water there, resources used to be there. They have a huge influx of migrants coming in all the cities. I'll check only in cities. That is a part of society. It's built on the idea they are a part of society.

But the question is, what's the difference between a society and a community? What is the difference? Give me some examples of where you are using the word community.

Society might be geographically bounded; a community might not be. So we say the Indian society, but there's also an Indian community, which may refer to Indian students living outside India, maybe? What are they called? NRIs? Diaspora? Diaspora, I suppose. Have you ever heard of diaspora? Indian diaspora.

What's the other forms of community? Religious communities, caste-based communities. They're not societies; they're communities.

By the way, if you land up in the US, how many get from UC or stay in the US for a long time? In the US, my parents work in the IT industry there. When they enter the US, this is a taboo, right? And he went there after his life. First thing I know, added into, it's the WhatsApp group. The WhatsApp group had the link to the caste. And across the United States, the length of time, whoever is there in the United States of that caste was in the WhatsApp group. And he's shocked because he's saying that the idea of the community is to help your brethren. It's a fraternity. To help the brother of your same caste. And it's a community.

Of course, other forms of community. If you were much younger, you should talk about much, I'd say, in modern communities. They have lots of communities based on various patterns of people sharing, like sexual orientation, similar backgrounds.

So this is where it gets right. Sexuality and gender. That's a good point. And what about bass? Bass, music. Have you heard about this? I don't know whether this class relates to this. Have you heard about this? What is this? It's the Desi hip-hop community. It is a community. They're very strongly knit communities because they want to start up. Now it's going all over.

Now, what is common between this is people having similar or same practices, value systems, ruled or regulated by similar norms, and mostly having similar aspirations. It completely goes against the idea of what is known as individualism. In that idea, when you people came to Hyderabad, that there's a 9-pointer there, there's a 5.5-pointer there, it's an attempt to break a certain kind of community. That is what our business is about. We can't be a part of the same community. Yet, when you become alumnus, we'll treat you all as a community. So, it's an oxymoron as a corporation. These exist, but this is celebrated in popular culture. This exists very much.

Okay. Now, what does community help us do? What does it help us do? Socializing. Yes, socializing. And there's another factor there. Can we be a similar class and occupation to form up as a group? As academics, we have a very good approach. What about the other side? Socialization. Forging a common goal. Forging a common goal. Now, what else? They can level them up to blind. This actually is another part of this. Network advantage.

One of the advantages is, if you think about the business communities of India, they actually lend money to their caste brethren without any interest. Can you give me money without interest? I'm not talking about a movement giving you thousands of rupees. Let's say for a business to require five lakh. No one is going to pay you five lakh rupees. You can't spend in money as well if you say that no one is starting a business.

Both of you are Gujarati Marasis. That's where, that's what our work is to do. And I have complete permission to say this about him. He's given me that permission. So, he's an Agarwal. And he lives in this rural town in Telangana. And I asked him, bro, how do you land up here? He said, my grandfather's father met some friends in Indore somewhere. It's a marriage. And these people are Telugus. They're like, why don't you come and do this business here? And eventually his grandfather's father came down and set up shop. And they have a family business in Telangana. They speak Telugu.

Now, this is the first generation. What about the second generation?

The second generation is there's an Agarwal community that's here. In Telangana, under the bridge, this is nothing but a product of this community. So, you guys matter. Yes, this is very important. What does it otherwise allow us to do? We're talking about positive things about the community. It's a very aggressive structure. If certain individuals identify themselves within a community, they over a certain element find themselves segregated from the main chunk of society. Exactly. So, when he was talking about people having built up communities from their lives, that's exactly that point. That's another big issue when it comes to that segregation happens because as a product of different communities.

What's the other advantage of having a community? Building a career. You could literally channel your dreams and aspirations because I belong to this community. All of the communities within you. It's so important. But the second part of the literature is in a Western society, it is really hard to find friends and to find partners. We are sorted here at the end of the day. Your community will get you friends. Your community is not getting the love of your life. Who's going to come to our age manager group? You're going to be world-class. It's really difficult in the West.

If you think about it, marrying within the community is very common. What is common is marrying within the same class structure. People with similar resources generally get to date each other. That is a fact. But, for example, there's this beautiful paper on Tinder. Have you heard of it? Which basically goes on to argue... It's called Upper Class Tinder Bubble Ambient. They're going to argue that when we ask people, why do people choose ADS? What's the advantage? What's the selling point of a wider community? Why do you require a wider community? That's another question.

Sometimes you're not attracted to people that are around you, and you don't gather other anomalous people. You may like a lot of people. So, more choices is better. First of all, when we said that, it's also true. That's a very consumptive logic to do it. What it means is, love, which is supposed to be this ethereal thing, happy, and love is for sight, it's brought to a marketplace. Whether it's good or bad, it doesn't matter for our social service. This is the real matter.

Now, how does the platform earn money? What's the business model here? Subscription model? There's a subscription model, of course. What's the other model? You can't just work on that. I think it has a business model. Similar, like, in Tinder they have a subscription model which increases the visibility for other people, giving more options, giving more likes, so it basically increases the chances of you finding someone.

Have you seen Shoppers Stop? There's this brand called Shoppers Stop which is generally in malls. Shoppers Stop does two sales a year, which I say are business sales. The first two days of the sale are exclusively for the members. Then it opens up for everyone. It's exactly that. It's an exclusive club of members who can access the wide range of whatever it is.

But the main question here was that when these people are working, what do you expect when you're not working? So the expectation might be that you want to see someone. Yeah, there was some controversy about a feature that you could pay to have a super like, in which the other person does not have to like you and you could just appear in their inbox regardless. Yeah, so this is something that, as you know, after being newspaper, there are really good places where you can find problems. The bell is coming up.

Now, let's think about dating as a process. Dating is not a practice. So it's not like, okay, I don't want to date, so I keep on dating. I hope that's not the case. And no, it's a process that somebody goes through.

Now, time period. The entire Global South norm is this should end up in marriage. With modern people, what has happened? What we're seeing is that dating or being in love does not come with an expired ego. It can be for a couple of years. It can be for a little bit. It can be for a lifetime. All is allowed. All is respected, right?

Now the question is posed to men and women, Indian men and women in the continent. If you are looking for a casual relationship, which generally means you're not going to get married to the person. Parents say, marry my sister. And the other is, if you are looking for a partner or any officer, right? Long-term, marriage, second marriage. What are the characteristics that you look at?

Interestingly, the first category, when they're talking about casual dating, the men said, she should have similar world views as me. Because obviously, you cannot handle disagreements. Second, she should basically be as much Western as much Eastern.

Which means, she should be able to carry off Western clothes but also a sari. It's a characteristic. And then the interviewer asked directly, "You don't care about class as in where she comes from, what she does in her work?" He said, "Yes, work-wise, I don't care. She's an IT professional. Class-wise, I don't care, right?" But that person already said that what matters is the skin color matter. He has already said that. So this guy is already totally racist.

Now, this person is also secular. Now you're going to marry. What's the characteristics? All of this just goes into a junk. He just said that the person has to be from my class. A product of modernity, a dating platform, still couldn't get rid of the class. But does it mean that it doesn't push that barrier? It does. I'm sure people are completely in each other's world. Let's say marriage, they're without characters. It's happening.

But a lot of people, like my friend in class 12, who said, "I'm the only leader of the community." He said that, class 12. I was like, "How do you fall in love with a guy?" If fall in love, it means that it's a hurdle. There's a serendipity attached to it. He said, "No, I have to fall in love with a guy." He told me, "I fell in love with him." And those people are still existing in the dating world. They're not dating.

Now, this again could be done. Why would this research be done? First of all, anonymous research. None of the biases details are there. Second, when this respondent went and spoke to them, he clearly stated that he would just work to understand how do people get convinced about their daily preferences, the new daily preferences. At the heart of it, what we find there is this community, or the existing community, very much sometimes supersedes, doesn't supersede the idea of individuality, sorry, supersedes the idea of individuality. If it was individualism, people should have not cared. People do not give the possible advice. Since they still keep on thinking about it, they still stay attached to the community.

I will give you two minutes. The reason why somebody who's in love and seriously likes each other, right, will still keep on thinking about the community. What is at stake here? Answer me. Give me two minutes because I ask you to practice here. So when you answer a question, you can answer it. Keep out of it.

Did you manage to improve your grades in school or in class? There might be some divided community in your home. Which means that you lose access to the network? What else? Eventual disintegration of the community. Family disagreements on both sides. Many else. Sometimes people fail to manage out of the class, the other family members. So, between violence, in mobile business, people might get created. One of the killings, in violence. There's a very small, like the policy in India, if they start getting married outside the community, they might disappear.

Yeah, that's a question of disintegration. That's literally disintegrated. All this is true, but as a song, you could say that it is attached to the idea of unity and value. The idea here is, marriage is sacrilege. Why? Because from a marriage comes out genuine. That's illegitimate baby. I don't understand the question of illegitimate baby. There cannot be illegitimate baby. Baby is a fraud. But legitimate baby, a child who is going to inherit the property, comes out of marriage. You want to hold that purity of marriage by making sure the property resources pass on within the same family. It shouldn't go out.

Now, that guy who was asking this question, did he think like that moment, saying that people think? Or did he understand that? It almost becomes a state of being, a norm. Yeah, if I do this, my parents are not going to tell me. If I do that, my other problem that a lot of people face is that if I marry out of my class, my family could be out of class. That's why I don't mind. It's just not the consensus of being here. All this is to maintain this purity.

The entire caste system comes out of the question of purity and division. You don't want to believe what? The bloodline. It needs to be as pure as possible. But it's also interesting that most people come out, and let's say the question of marriage or the question of when, there's a great class coming, he said, "I'm going to look at that. What's the other option?" We have to build new alliances. What's the other option? But to search for allies and friends out there in the community as well. So somehow, I'm not saying that communities aren't bad, but I'm saying is the idea of communities become much more bigger.

It is, the entire counterculture movement across history has shown that rather than primitive communities, it is modern communities that came up to protect the individual and their wants and needs.

If you're interested, read about this entire movement that happened in Chicago, New York, called the Black Panther Movement. It was African Americans with guns protecting their own communities against police violence, providing education for free and food for free. That is where I have taken the concept down, that you need to try to have rules in the first place before you build a nation.

So communities, both of which progressiveness and both of which are great. Even in communities, there are two types. One is ascribed at the birth, task-oriented religious communities, ascribed at the birth. Achieved community is what? If you think your life is about the community, it's achieved. If you think there's a community of people who share music interest with, it's achieved. You have to make a choice. You have achieved. It has nothing to do with where you are born.

As a sociologist, basically what we study is the relationship, again, between the self and the family, self and the community, self and the society. And in all these versions, you can also say the family and the society, family and community, community and society. This ladder that you see, it's like it goes up and down. That's what we study. And we take up cases like we did for Tick Tick and we try to examine them.

The other interesting part is sociology is deeply valuable to common sense. What is common sense in your knowledge? Common sense in your knowledge is where you are from?

Bihar. Where are you from? What is the judgment that you had about Hyderabad before coming here?

Honestly, it's a normal South Indian university.

South Indian university?

Yeah.

So nothing to hate you about Hyderabad before you came to Hyderabad?

Not in particular.

What do you have about people in Hyderabad?

The central movement?

No, it's nice and relatively violence.

It's violence?

No.

Now, where do these judgments come from?

The stereotypes in society. A lot of our common sense is not in the stereotypes of our communities.

How many of you here love cats or dogs? People who don't love these, don't put their hands up. Don't love them. How many love cats or dogs? Like if you really do with a cat or dog, why do you not love them?

One person? What is the stereotype about a cat that you don't like?

This is like some of the highlights.

No, no, that's not true. This is like a stereotype. It's like a baby. They don't care about me.

I like how peaceful they are.

No, my question is, what is the negative stereotype about a cat that you don't like?

They bite a lot, they scratch a lot, they are very violent sometimes. They would kill you if they could. The other thing is that cats are bad omen. Especially black cats. Black cats are bad omen. They cross the road, you are like, what should I do? So those things are also there.

This almost seems like alien to some of us because we are like, this doesn't matter. We are very progressive people, we are rational people. But isn't this a common sense in the community that people keep on saying on the streets?

I have seen drivers who stop. They were very bad at it. My morning was really dodgy for them. Because it's a cat or whatever. Cat or horse. And now it's a second person. Then I go, welcome to the hotel. Then something else passes by my side. And then a man or woman walked by and said, the woman has started this woman. Now it's okay, I can go. It's then common sense.

A common sense that a lot of that common sense that we might have is our occupation. How many of you believe that there is this common-sensical idea that Triple ITs, IITs, and BITS produce the best coders? Then comes the design. Produce the best coders. It's the best training for coding.

Now it's interesting, why do you believe that?

CMS on that, that is very generally perceived notion that the coders do have a generally good relationship with the coders. It's not bad because of this. You agree with me?

So basically, but interestingly, if you see the history of community, where does it start?

United States. All the best coders that you can think of came from open-source communities, came from no formal training. Entire, for example, there's something called anarchist manifesto to community. There's something called, it's called flash computing clubs or something like that. So all those things were basically because computing itself was a hobby. It was something that you do for fun. It's much later that it becomes such a formal education because the service sector kicks up. The economy is brought in and it becomes a bit formal education. And because it's in formal industry, industry always recognizes formal education, mostly.

Until you have those geniuses who think that CBC guy, did you read about it? The guy who said that, oh well, I can fix this very easily by doing ABC. And he was so famous that IIT Arvind was paying 1.5 lakhs a month for him. He started coding at the age of 18. He's an employee, he doesn't have a graduation.

So these people are very less. But the formalization of a certain field, industrialization of computing, has led to this common-sense belief that the best code is from IITs. It works for you people; it's great. But what I'm saying is that it's common sense. The socialists are going to try to argue not otherwise, but at least investigate that common sense.

The other common sense that a lot of us would agree with is that, what I think you said in the last class, family and children are basically the essential asset for a woman. The ultimate asset for a woman. The ultimate asset for a woman is family and children. But this is very common sense. It's not that she said it. I have heard it from my childhood. Like, oh wow, you're a mother. You've got your entire life sorted. Your world is so beautiful. Yeah, it's also very dependable, specifically with the young people. But it's almost like you brought the child into this world, you have to bring him up, raise that person, it's going to be a lot of joy. It's common sense. There's an empowerment in the question.

Now, going forward, when we talk about the definition, this is one thing called: what's the difference between a social structure? What is a social structure? Then what is a social institute? And what are social processes?

Akshay, what is a social structure? Louder.

Cast.

He said cast, but I didn't say cast. I'm not saying this is social. Anybody else, what's a social structure?

It's an informal, inherent, organizational society.

What does an organization do?

It is about influence your decisions or influence your entire life. Other way to say it is, a social structure stratifies people in different categories. Class is one, gender is the other, sexuality is the other. These are social structures. In many ways, structures allow us or disallow us certain things.

So when a philosopher standing in front of you would argue for free will, as a sociologist, I would say, but what do we do about structures? Whatever we believe, whatever we practice, might be a product of a structure that we don't have. I can't be fair question.

Have you seen Into the Wild? You know about the movie Into the Wild? Okay, it's a fossil movie about a man from MIT saying that, I'm not going to live by the rules of the world, takes a Volkswagen van and goes to the village. It used to be demons for a lot of other things. It's spoken about escapism and escape from all kinds of structures. That was his idea.

Now, is it so easy to go beyond, like break the structure and go beyond as an individual? No. Why? The moment, even today, our friend's mother means to me, not always, but many of my friend's mothers and fathers, these people are not doctors anymore. They are not generally people who are to working-class people. They'll ask my name. I'll say, who else is in the first name? And they'll say, Rajashree what?

Why is that not important? It is to fit me into the structure. It is to locate me in the structure. Otherwise, it's very uncanny. Like, I cannot place you anywhere.

A social institution is something like a family, which regulates our behavior at a multiple level. And a social process is like urbanization. A lot of people think they won't stop today. They'll start the next day. But next day is another race that cannot be delayed.

These both will, peer-ins both, think about a social problem or phenomenon that people like to write at this center. So, spend a few months on it, because that requires multiple articulations of the problem.

So, when do we meet? Next Tuesday?

Next Tuesday. Before you go, a piece of paper is still in attendance. Okay, so please put down.
